Family or Lineage Overview
HThere are three reasons that scholars mentioned for the potential of skipping his father's name when we call him the son of al-Jarrah. One of them is that his grandfather played more of a fatherly role in his life. One of the commonly mentioned narrations that we find is that his own father was after him in battle and wanted to sacrifice him. He also has a brother by the name of Yazid, who did convert to Islam and is considered a sahabi, but we don't have much information about him at all. His mother’s name was Umayma, but her lineage is disputed and according to Ibn Hajar, she is  considered one who accepted Islam.

Conversion and Early Islam
He was a teenager, 18 or 19 years old, and he's considered one of the first ten people to accept Islam. He accepted Islam at the hands of Abu Bakr as-Siddiq. He is amongst the first group that were given da'wah by Abu Bakr, and he immediately accompanies the Prophet  and becomes one from the people of Dar al-Arqam.

Persecution
When you're there, imagine the scenes of persecution and imagine the scene of victory. 
There are long years of persecution of the Messenger, where as you're sitting there around the Kaaba, you can look around and you can imagine some of those narrations about the Prophet first being persecuted. Other than that, when it comes to his Meccan life, there isn't much that is talked about at all, except that he was tortured and he was patient. Some of the writers mention that he was tortured by his father severely to the point he was almost killed. Some of them said that one of the reasons why there's such silence on him in Meccan seerah, which generally is not covered as much as the seerah in Medina, is because he went into hiding because of the severity of the persecution.

Hijrah
Al-Dhahabi says if he indeed made that migration, that it wasn't for long. He went to Abyssinia; he gained the reward of making hijrah to Abyssinia because there's a reward in hijrah, and he returned to Mecca for some time until he made hijrah to Medina as well. And his brother from the Ansar when he made hijrah was the great Mu'adh ibn Jabal. He gained one of the great distinctions amongst the companions was to be from amongst those that made the two migrations.

Battle
He’d fight alongside the Prophet SAW in every battle. In every battle that he fought in, he held some position as a general holding a banner, leading alongside the Prophet SAW. Even after the death of the Prophet SAW, Abu Ubaidah RA was always in some capacity, a general in the army. He's extremely skilled in battle, he could track armies; he had certain skill sets that others did not have. In Badr, his father was after him and he was avoiding his father throughout the battle, but eventually his father ambushed him. He had a singular mission in Badr, which was to kill his son, and Abu Ubaidah, instead defending himself, had to kill his father. Damascus was conquered at the same time by Abu Ubaidah and Khalid.

Virtue
He was a teenager, 18 or 19 years old, and he's considered one of the first ten people to accept Islam. And he is also one of the first to memorize the Quran. The Prophet himself praised him and that put him in a certain light with the rest of the companions of the Prophet. Abu Ubaidah was one of those that made the first two hijras and his reputation in battle was good. The Prophet Muhammad says that the he is the trustworthy of this ummah.

Death
Abu Ubaidah had come to meet Umar outside of greater Syria, and as they were meeting outside of ash-sham on the border, the news came to them that the plague had struck and that people were dying  and left. The plague started to ravage more people and Umar was worried about some of his sahaba including Abu Ubaidah. Abu Ubaidah said let me stay with my army and I'm pleased with the decree of Allah, and if I die in this plague, then it is shahada. Abu Ubaidah is the one who narrates the famous hadith that if a person dies from a plague, that they're a martyr. Abu Ubaidah takes his camel, starts to look for a place, and then he also struck by the plague and the people rushed to their leader, to Abu Ubaidah, who is the head of them all, he's the leader of Ash-Sham. And as they surround him and he's dying, he says to them that, “Indeed, Allah  has written upon the child of Adam death. And when he dies, the people weep over the death of their leader of Abu Ubaidah al-Jarrah.