As-salamu alaikum wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh. Everyone and welcome back to the first. With that, we end off with two people who are both from the ten promised paradise but could not have had different life cycles and lifestyles, and that is Abu Ubaidah al-Jarrah RA, and the next week we will finish off with Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA. When we talk about Abu Ubaidah al-jarrah RA this is a man that was so elevated and so high in the eyes of the companions of the prophet SAW and the prophet SAW himself but we don't often talk about him in the capacity of the rest of the ten promised paradise and I think that as people sort of go through the names of the ten promised paradise there are always a few names that are forgotten right often forgotten when people are trying to recount those ten names. Obviously, you get the four khulafa, and then you have some of the more prominent names the more well-known names, and then usually it's Abu Ubaidah or Sa'eed ibn Zayd that would be left out of the ten. 

So who is Abu Ubaidah al-Jarrah RA and what's his story? First and foremost, his name is actually Amir ibn Abdillah ibn al-Jarrah, so his first name is Amir, his father's name is Abdullah, his grandfather is al-Jarrah, and we'll talk about why we don't refer to him as ibn Abdillah but instead as ibn al-Jarrah in a minute. But first let's just mention that he is a Qurashi. He is one of the tribes of Quraysh, or his sub tribe belongs to Quraysh but it is a far out tribe. He's from the tribe known as Banu al-Harith ibn Fihr, and it is a distant tribe from the Prophet SAW. Not a powerful tribe or an influential tribe in Meccan politics, even though it is from Quraysh. So he has the benefit of being a Qurashi, but at the same time, his tribe is not like Banu Hashim or Bani Umayyah or some of the other very powerful tribes that we have been speaking about. So let's talk about his name for a bit, why is he Abu Ubaidah ibn al-Jarrah and not Abu Ubaidah ibn Abdillah? There are three reasons that scholars mentioned for the potential of skipping his father's name when we call him the son of al-Jarrah. One of them is that it could be that his grandfather played more of a fatherly role in his life so when the Prophet SAW mentions that I am the son of Abdul Muttalib. 

Then that's one reason that they say that perhaps it is that Abdul Muttalib spent more time with the Prophet SAW than his own father who passed away before he was born. So it could be that al-Jarrah actually raised him as his grandfather, and that's one possibility. The second one is that sometimes and it also goes back to the same narration about the Prophet SAW saying I am the son of Abdul Muttalib, sometimes the more well known of the two, meaning if the grandfather was more well known than the father, because the grandfather is technically still a father, then a person will be known by the grandfather's name rather than the father. So, another reason why they say that the Prophet SAW says I am the son of Abdul Muttalib, in fact, the more common reason that is cited is that the Prophet SAW was citing Abdul Muttalib. The third reason is one that will be understood in the capacity of this biography is that if the father was humiliated or known for something very negative, so if the grandfather was known for something exceedingly positive or the father was known for something exceedingly negative, then sometimes a person would go by the name of the grandfather rather than the father in either of those two instances. 

So we'll talk about where that comes from. So who is his mother? His mother her name was Umayma, but her lineage is disputed and according to Ibn Hajar, though we don't have any information on her, she is actually considered one who accepted Islam. So his father certainly is not amongst those that accepted Islam, his mother may have accepted Islam according to some narrations. He also has a brother by the name of Yazid, who did convert to Islam and is considered a sahabi, may Allah be pleased with him, but we don't have much information about him at all. So what is Abu Ubaidah's story?

Abu Ubaidah RA grew up in a family of archers, and he was a skilled talented military general without ever having led an army. He learned all of the crafts that have to do with the army and warfare, even though he had never actually led one before. So he knew how to shoot at targets whether they were stationary or whether they were moving. He was such an accurate archer that he would shoot right in the middle and he would split targets in half. He knew how to ride his horse and shoot moving targets at the same time. He knew how to carry heavy objects. He knew how to ride different types of animals. He had huge arms to where he was capable with his sword and capable with his bow and arrow, capable on a horse, capable on foot. He had learned all of the skills of detecting the signs of an army. So Abu Ubaidah RA, as a young man, in fact they say that by the time he was six, he could already handle a bow and arrow, and by the time he was twelve, he was already more skilled than the most skilled warrior. Abu Ubaidah could detect whether an army had been in a certain place by the footsteps. He could tell you what animals were there. He could tell you the count of how many people and animals were there. So that's the level of the skill that he had and so he was being prepared for something great even as a young man. 

Now, when did he accept Islam? He was a teenager, 18 or 19 years old, and he's considered one of the first ten people to accept Islam. Again, you're going to keep on seeing people that are within the first 10, 15, or 20. Abu Ubaidah RA is considered to be from that first group of people who accepted Islam at the hands of whom? Abu Bakr RA. So, I'm going to preface this by saying that everything we talk about today and everything we talk about next week with Abdur Rahman ibn Auf, all of it is to the credit of Abu Bakr as-Siddiq RA because he is the one who introduced Islam to both of them. He embraces Islam at the hands of Abu Bakr as-Siddiq, amongst the first group that were given da'wah by Abu Bakr, and he immediately accompanies the Prophet SAW and becomes one from the people of Dar al-Arqam. So he learns in the school of Dar al-Arqam amongst the early companions of the Prophet SAW. 

Now, other than that, when it comes to his Meccan life, there isn't much that is talked about at all, in fact, except that he was tortured and that he was patient. And so you'll find that some of the writers will mention that he was tortured by his father so severely that he was almost killed. Some of them said that one of the reasons why there's such silence on him in Meccan seerah, which generally is not covered as much as the seerah in Medina, is because he went into hiding because of the severity of the persecution. We find that there are some narrations that suggest that he played a role in assisting in the boycott, but even that is somewhat ambiguous, that he was helping gather the food for the tribe of the Prophet SAW under the boycott. And even his hijrah to Abyssinia is there's no information except that he is amongst those that made the hijrah, the second migration to Abyssinia. And Al-Dhahabi says if he indeed made that migration, that it wasn't for long. He went to Abyssinia; he gained the reward of making hijrah to Abyssinia because there's a reward in hijrah, and he returned to Mecca for some time until he made hijrah to Medina as well. And his brother from the Ansar when he made hijrah was the great Mu'adh ibn Jabal RA. So he gained one of the great distinctions amongst the companions was to be from amongst those that made the two migrations. 

He gained that distinction, he would be amongst those who fought in every battle alongside the Prophet SAW in some capacity as a general, which is something that is an added layer of uniqueness for him. So he didn't just fight alongside the Prophet SAW in every battle. But every battle that he fought in, he held some position as a general holding a banner, leading alongside the Prophet SAW. Even after the death of the Prophet SAW, Abu Ubaidah RA was always in some capacity, a general in the army. And he is also one of the first to memorize the Quran. So he was memorizing the Quran as it was being revealed in Mecca, and he had a special attachment to the Quran, which reminds us of Salim RA and the way that these people combined their love of the Quran with their love of the Prophet SAW and fighting alongside the Prophet SAW and defending him. So he's extremely skilled in battle, and the stories about him in battle are stories that display his position with the Prophet SAW and what a hero he was considered. Of course, as we said, he could track armies; he had certain skill sets that others did not have. 

And one of the things that's mentioned about the Battle of Badr in particular is his father.  Remember that the Battle of Badr is known as the day that distinguished and the day of criterion. That people had to fight against their family members for the very first time. Some of the sahaba had to fight their brothers, like Musab had to fight his brother Ubaidullah. Many of them had to fight their uncles and their fathers. When it came to Abu Ubaidah, one of the narrations that we find that is commonly mentioned is that his own father was after him in battle and that his own father wanted to sacrifice him. He was so angry with him becoming a Muslim that he wanted to sacrifice him to his idol, and he was pursuing him over and over again. And this is mentioned in the later books of seerah. It is a difficult narration to come across. And what this suggests is that his father was after him in Badr and he was avoiding his father throughout the battle, but eventually his father ambushed him. He had a singular mission in Badr, which was to kill his son, and Abu Ubaidah, instead defending himself, had to kill his father. So that's why some of the scholars mention that he's not Abu Ubaidah ibn Abdillah but Abu Ubaidah Ibn Al Jarrah because he was put in that difficult situation. And when he did that, he was in a state of obvious grief and did not know what would happen to him and that's where some of the commentators of the Quran mention that Surah Al-Mujadilah verse 22 was revealed in response that the messenger of Allah was more beloved to these people than their own family members. And when they were put in that situation where their own family members had come out against them to kill them, Allah SWT had removed any burden from them in that regard. So again, that entire incident between him and his father in Badr is one that is a difficult one. You don't find it in some of the earlier sources, it's more from the later commentators on the surah, which cast some doubt on it. But nonetheless, we find that Abu Ubaidah RA, like the other companions of the Prophet SAW was put in a difficult situation in which he had to fight against his own family members. 

The real story,  from his stories of battling alongside the Prophet SAW that really touches the heart is his role in Uhud. Of course, Uhud was the day of Talha RA, as we've said, and a day in which a few of the companions of the Prophet SAW rallied around him and protected the Prophet SAW even in the worst of those moments. Even when the battle seemed to be lost at that point and they were putting their bodies on the line in front of the Prophet SAW as the arrows were coming towards him, as the swords were swinging at the Prophet SAW, as all of these difficult strikes were coming to the Messenger of Allah SAW. What we find is that with Abu Ubaidah RA, he did something very unique, and that is when the helmet of the Prophet SAW was driven into his face. Remember the Prophet SAW suffered numerous wounds on the day of Uhud, and he was almost killed, knocked into a ditch, teeth knocked out. His helmet was driven into his jaw SAW, and that was from one blow that drove it into, so you can imagine it being driven into the side of his face SAW. And Abu Ubaidah RA goes to the Prophet SAW and he grabs the helmet of the Prophet SAW with his teeth, meaning he bites the helmet of the Prophet SAW with his teeth so that he could pull it out and while he pulls out successfully the chains from the cheeks of the Prophet SAW, he loses his two teeth. So the teeth that he was using to bite so that he could pull the helmet out of the face of the Prophet SAW fell. And because of that, he had a speech impediment, and I mean this is one of the miracles of that moment that they used to say about his speech impediment that his dialect or his speech became more beautiful with the impediment than prior to the impediment. So they said that the appearance, the sound when he would speak though he now had a twist in his speech, that it actually sounded more beautiful than before he had it. So this was one of the miracles of Allah SWT upon him and of course in response to a great action that he did in the service of the Messenger SAW in those difficult moments of Uhud. 

And the Prophet SAW used to frequently praise him. Rasulullah SAW used to say what an incredible man, what a great man Abu Ubaidah ibn al-Jarrah is. And there are a few incidents that show the Prophet SAW's praise for him, where most of the incidents of praise of Abu Ubaidah actually come in the Khilafah of Abu Bakr and the Khilafah of Umar. But you find some incidents where the Prophet SAW himself praised him and that put him in a certain light with the rest of the companions of the Prophet SAW, beyond the fact that he is one of the people of Badr, that he is one of the earliest that accepted Islam, that he is one of the people that made the first two hijras and his reputation in battle. And one of those incidents is when two Christian leaders had come from Najran to meet the Prophet SAW to debate with him. And their names were Al-Aqib and Al-Syed. And as they were debating with the Prophet SAW, they were about to do what's known as Mubahala. So they would, after the debate, invoke the curse of God upon the one who was lying or the one who was wrong. And these two people, basically at the end of the day, these two leaders backed out from this debate with the Prophet SAW, or particularly the Mubahala, because they said if he is indeed a prophet, then we're going to be cursed. So they instead wanted to learn Islam, and they said send someone with us to teach us the religion and to judge between us. And they said, particularly, send with us a trustworthy person. 

So the Prophet SAW responded to them and he said I will send with you a man who is strong and he is trustworthy. And when the Sahaba heard that, the Sahaba always wanted to be amongst those who were praised by the Prophet SAW. So they heard the Prophet SAW say that the person I'm going to send with you is strong and trustworthy. And of course, these are two characteristics that are praised in the Quran as well. So the Sahaba started to walk in front of the Prophet SAW and make their appearances known to the Prophet SAW, hoping it would be them. So one of them was Umar bin Khattab RA. They were hoping Rasulullah SAW was going to say that it was him because each one wanted to be known by the Prophet SAW as strong and trustworthy. So the next day, as they are praying in the first line, as they are making their appearances known to the Prophet SAW, their presence known to the Messenger SAW, the Prophet SAW says, “Stand up, O Abu Ubaidah.” And the Prophet SAW said that, “Every ummah has an ameen, and the trustworthy one of this ummah is Abu Ubaidah.” Now remember when we talked about Az-Zubayr RA, the Prophet SAW said every prophet has a disciple and my disciple is Az-Zubayr RA. That does not mean that the other sahaba are not like disciples to the Prophet SAW, but what that means is that he was distinguished in his response to the Prophet SAW. When it comes to Abu Ubaidah, the Prophet SAW is saying, every ummah has a trustworthy person, someone that looks out for the best interests of the ummah always and that is truthful to the ummah, truthful to their covenant with Allah, truthful to their covenant with the Messenger SAW and truthful with their covenant to the ummah of Muhammad SAW and that person for this ummah is truthful, Abu Ubaidah RA. 

And you'll see exactly why, when we start to get to some of the incidents that took place with him after the death of the Messenger SAW. Some of the scholars mentioned that Rasulullah SAW never gave one of his titles to someone else, so he is SAW as-sadiq al-ameen. So for the Prophet SAW to refer to Abu Ubaidah RA in this way is truly a form of unique praise to him RA. There's another narration, and typically when we talk about seerah, obviously narrations in the seerah are not put to the same level of scrutiny as hadith and things of the sunnah that are bearing in terms of jurisprudence and in terms of what is to be derived from them. So typically when we're looking through the seerah, we're a little bit more lenient in that regard. But I will mention this one is narrated, it's found in seerah A’lam an-Nubala’ by al-Dhahabi and some of the books of biography. It's narrated from al-Hasan al-Basri that the Prophet SAW said that there is no person amongst you whom I would want to take some of their qualities except for Abu Ubaidah. Meaning that there's something special about Abu Ubaidah. Again I mentioned that this is a narration in which there's a missing link because of the severity of it or the gravity of it. But it's still just a form of praise for Abu Ubaidah RA and the way that his character was known to have shined amongst the companions of the Prophet SAW. 

Abdullah ibn Mas'ud RA mentioned that my close friends amongst the companions of the Prophet SAW are three. Abu Bakr, Umar and Abu Ubaidah. So he's in that company with Abu Bakr and Umar in the narration of Ibn Mas'ud. Abdullah ibn Umar RA, he also put him in that company when he said there were three amongst Quraysh whose manners and character excelled all others, and they had the gift of eloquent and gentle speech, and if people were to look at them then they could not stop looking at them, and if they were to speak then people would not stop listening to them. And he said that is Abu Bakr, Uthman, and Abu Ubaidah. So in the narration of Ibn Mas'ud he's put in the company of Abu Bakr and Umar, and in the narration of Ibn Umar, he's put in the company of Abu Bakr and Uthman. And in a powerful narration, Aisha RA was asked by one of her students, Abdullah ibn Shaqeq, he said I asked Aisha RA, “Which of the companions of the Messenger SAW were most beloved to him?” She said, “Abu Bakr.” Which is well known. And then I said, “Who?” and then she said to me, “Umar.” So it's well known Abu Bakr and Umar. I said to her, “And then who?” So she said, “Abu Ubaidah Ibn Jarrah.” So even in the words of Aisha RA, she is in the companionship of Abu Bakr and Umar, may Allah be pleased with them all. 

What are some other qualities that we know about him before we get to some of these incidents with him? One of them is that he was very easy going. So he's tall, muscular, extremely handsome, very powerful, but at the same time, he was very easy going with his character, not one who spoke loudly, not one who dominated his gatherings, but one who went with the flow RA. And even though he had all of these prominent characteristics, he was known for his asceticism. So he wore rough clothing and he never really cared much for the matters of this world. What that also looked like in terms of zuhud was that he really didn't care for leadership and he didn't care for politics at all. So you don't find that Abu Ubaidah RA is one who really cared about positioning at all. In fact, Abu Ubaidah was one who had to be forced into his position constantly because Abu Ubaidah RA did not seek it, and that's what made him so worthy.  You compare that to what the Prophet SAW mentioned that leadership is a trust. Then who better for leadership than the trustworthy one of this ummah? So he's constantly being ushered to a leadership role, starting with the Prophet SAW, even though Abu Ubaidah RA clearly does not care about leadership roles. 

Also, from his asceticism is that he didn't marry much or have many children at all. In fact, any descendants that he would have had there are practically nothing about his family life, and any descendants that he had were believed to have died along with him in what we will talk about in the Amwas plague. So he really did not have much of an attachment to this dunya. He was a soldier, and he saw his life as being a soldier in the service of the Messenger SAW, and he lives his life in mission after mission after mission, being deployed by the Prophet SAW and then Abu Bakr and Umar. He's not one that does much else in that regard, and because of that, just solidified his position of leadership. A dignified man who solidified his position of leadership in every single instance. And there are a few of these missions that are narrated. One of them is that when the Prophet SAW sent him and Amr ibn al-As RA on a mission, he said to them, “Do not differ amongst yourselves in terms of leadership.” Now, Amr was a new convert to Islam. And Amr ibn al-As of course, had a learning curve like many of those that had converted to Islam especially after the Fath in the last years of the Prophet SAW. So it took him some time to adjust and he had a certain position before Islam when he was opposing the Prophet SAW. So when the Prophet SAW sends them out, he says to Abu Ubaidah and Amr without assigning a clear leader amongst the two. Though it would be understood that Abu Ubaidah RA because of his seniority, his being amongst the first, his being a people of Badr, his being someone who lost his teeth in service of the Messenger SAW and Uhud, being a memorizer of Quran, that he would be amongst those, or he would be considered the natural leader. But because the Prophet SAW did not assign a leader between Abu Ubaidah and Amr, may Allah be pleased with them, as soon as they leave, when they're on the way, Amr says to Abu Ubaidah that, “Listen, I'm leading this army and you're following me.” So Amr insists upon his leadership position and Abu Ubaidah immediately gives it to him and he actually even puts Amr forward to lead the salah, even though Amr was a new Muslim. Because he understood the command of the Prophet SAW that do not differ amongst yourselves in terms of leadership, so he was not going to argue about it at all and he was easy going. So he said, you lead and I will reinforce you, I'll be your general. So he puts Amr forward, Amr RA leads this army and Abu Ubaidah RA follows and he has absolutely no complaint in that regard. 

The Prophet SAW deploys him in multiple missions especially in those last years where it started to move beyond just what was taking place in the immediate vicinity of Medina and Mecca. And there's one very beautiful narration, which is known as the story of the whale. Jabir ibn Abdillah RA, he says that Rasulullah SAW sent a group of us to the sea on a mission on the sea and he appointed Abu Ubaidah al-Jarrah as our leader. And we were about 300 men, and along the way, we kept running out of food. So Abu Ubaidah RA, as the general, he was apportioning the food appropriately, he was trying to do his best to make sure that everyone was eating what they needed, but at the same time he was keeping in charge of it the entire time. Throughout the journey, all they had were some dates, and Abu Ubaidah RA was giving us our daily ration of those dates little by little until it decreased to such an extent that every day, we'd only have a date to eat. So imagine they're in battle, they're on a mission, and they only have a date to sustain themselves on a daily basis. And the narrator says I asked Jabir RA, “How could you survive with one date?” He said that we came to know its value when even that finished. So it came to a point where we didn't even have that one tamr that we would look forward to that one date every day. So Ramadan is coming up and you break your fast with that date. Think about this narration. He said then we reached the coast, and when we got to the coast, this whale washed up and we'd never, these were not people that were used to the seas at all, they were a desert people. So Allah SWT caused this whale to wash up, and he said that the whale was like a mountain. It was so large that we would eat from it for over two weeks, for 18 days and nights, we would eat whatever we wanted from that fish. Obviously, they're calling it a fish it's a large whale. He said that it was so large that we could sit as a group in its eye sockets and Abu Ubaidah RA ordered that two of its ribs be fixed on the ground in the form of an arc, and that a person could ride a camel underneath them and the person would not touch the top of that rib. So imagine how large this whale was that they could sit in its eye sockets in groups of 10 and they could pass under it as Abu Ubaidah RA had ordered that the ribs be fixed in the ground and they would ride their animals underneath it, and it would not touch them. So this was an incident that took place with Abu Ubaidah RA, a famous incident that's mentioned in Sahih al-Bukhari. 

One of the greatest honours that the Prophet SAW could have given him, and I just try to imagine that incident anytime you go to Mecca, may Allah write it down for all of us. When you're there, imagine the scenes of persecution and imagine the scene of victory because they're both very important when you're there. And in Mecca, at least in the seerah of the Prophet SAW, there really wasn't much but those two things. There are long years of persecution of the Messenger SAW, where as you're sitting there around the Kaaba, you can look around and you can imagine some of those narrations about the Prophet SAW first being persecuted around the Kaaba and all of these wonderful companions that we have covered, may Allah be pleased with them all. And then you have the incident of Fath Mekkah, where the Prophet SAW enters with such dignity and such mercy and in that such power SAW, not by responding with evil but by setting a new standard SAW for Mecca as he fulfilled, or as Allah fulfilled his promise upon our Prophet SAW. Now, we always talk about the Prophet SAW coming into Mecca and I want you to imagine the scene that Rasulullah SAW of course, split the army into three which was common. So one group enters from the left, one group enters from the right, and then one group enters from the center, and Rasulullah SAW is in front. Every one of those three groups has someone holding a banner that's leading that group. The person who was walking in front of the Prophet SAW, and in front of him throughout SAW as they were coming into Mecca, was none other than Abu Ubaidah RA. So think about the position in that glorious moment entering into Mecca and Abu Ubaidah RA is in front of the Prophet SAW carrying the banner of the center of that army. And when they arrive in Mecca, Abu Ubaidah RA is the one who causes the camel of the Prophet SAW to kneel, and who pitches the tent for the Prophet SAW, and tents him SAW in that moment. 

I mean think about the glory of that moment, and in Abu Ubaidah RA's humility. He doesn't boast about that moment, he doesn't talk about it, we know this through the accounts of other people about him. So the ameen of this ummah leading al-sadiq al-ameen, of course leading physically, but Rasulullah SAW is always leading, standing in front of the Prophet SAW and leading the way in that glorious moment. So that is a position that signifies truly the rank of a person amongst the sahabah of the Prophet SAW, and Abu Ubaidah was of course one of those that was persecuted and it is of course very interesting that you find that there is a trend here that starts to unfold when you look at Fath Mekkah that those that were persecuted in Mecca were put to lead on that day including Abu Ubaidah and Bilal and those that were like them, may Allah SWT be pleased with them all. So that was his position with the Prophet SAW, and when the Prophet SAW passed away, Abu Bakr al-sadiq RA, of course in the famous incident of going to the saqeefa, he takes with him Abu Ubaidah and Umar, may Allah be pleased with them. So this is where the khalifa is going to be appointed and Abu Bakr RA is resolving the affairs of the ummah and as he goes to the saqeefa, he takes with him these two men and Abu Bakr without telling Umar and Abu Ubaidah why he brought them with him, Abu Bakr RA he says to the ansar, he says, “I have with me here these two, I have the Farooq, and I have the ameen of this ummah. I have Umar and I have Abu Ubaidah, and I am pleased. I am pleased with either one of them as our leader. So choose which one of them you would like to be our leader.” 

Can you imagine that, you know Abu Bakr RA is not one who would say this simply as an expression. Abu Bakr RA would not say that except that he has thought about it and he has taken a thoughtful decision RA knowing who these people are, knowing the virtue of Umar and knowing the virtue of Abu Ubaidah, and he says that choose either one of them. And we know of course that instead, Abu Bakr RA was rightfully chosen as the khalifa. But the fact that Abu Ubaidah was even suggested in the same sentence as Umar by Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with them to be the khalifa of this ummah, shows you his position. Of course Abu Bakr is appointed and while Abu Bakr is appointed, Abu Ubaidah RA spends his life under Abu Bakr doing what he does best in missions and at war in battle with the Byzantines in particular, fighting alongside the borders of a greater Syria. And when Abu Bakr RA passes away, Umar RA sends a letter to Abu Ubaidah RA, appointing him as the new general to replace Khalid ibn Walid RA. And of course, I've spoken about this before, that Umar RA said that I did not replace Khalid out of hatred for him or betrayal, but I was afraid that the Muslims would put their trust in him, and so they would be entrusted to him. Meaning they put more trust in the sword of Khalid than in Allah SWT, so he replaced Khalid ibn Walid RA with Abu Ubaidah al-Jarrah and Abu Ubaidah received this in the middle of battle and he didn't tell Khalid right away because the battle was about to start and he did not want to disrupt the battle or Khalid's plan.

He didn't want to mess things up, so he waited until after the battle, and then he conveyed what was conveyed to him through that letter to Khalid, and Khalid RA says, “May Allah have mercy on you, O Abu Ubaidah. Why didn't you tell me as soon as the letter came to you?” and he said to him that “I didn't want to ruin the plan or take away from you. We don't seek the leadership of this world and we don't work for this world, but instead, we are all brothers for the sake of Allah SWT.” So Abu Ubaidah RA waited until after the battle, and then it was known that Abu Ubaidah was the commander, the general, but at times, Khalid RA is still appointed to lead specific missions and armies. The famous battle of Yarmouk was the most famous battle of Khalid RA, and they really became a great complement to each other. Because Abu Ubaidah, as some of the scholars mentioned, he was a negotiator. Khalid RA was not a negotiator. Khalid, when he met with the leaders of other armies and other groups, he immediately escalated, and it went straight to battle. Abu Ubaidah was the opposite of that, and he would negotiate. He had more diplomacy than Khalid RA so especially when it came to Ash-Sham, because there is a lot of complexity in dealing with the Byzantine Empire with its different wings. Abu Ubaidah was able to assure some of the leaders and the elders to avert some of the conflict that would take place and to assure them we see also that. Because they were both brilliant in battle, that Damascus was conquered at the same time by Abu Ubaidah and Khalid. They approached it from different directions. They were able to conquer Damascus together, may Allah be pleased with them and Abu Ubaidah was the leader of Ash-Sham. 

He built mosques in greater Syria, he built hospitals there, he built a famous dam to stop some of the flooding that used to come to Ash-Sham. And Abu Ubaidah plays a role in the entire history there, that early history of Ash-Sham, including in Jerusalem, including in Palestine, where there's a famous story that takes place there. So Umar RA used to love him and used to honor him, he used to kiss his hand even as he was the khalifah when he would see him. And there are a few incidents narrated between Umar and Abu Ubaidah, and then we'll go to his death, may Allah be pleased with him. One of them is that Umar RA told Abu Ubaidah, “Take me to your home.” And this was common for Umar RA to check up on his generals. As he'd go and check up on his ummah, he'd also check up on his generals, he'd check up on his governors and he would go to their homes. And obviously with Abu Ubaidah, he's the one who is the ameen of this ummah, he's not going to be hiding anything. So Abu Ubaidah RA says, “What are you going to do at my place except that your eyes are going to shed tears because you're going to see the difficulty that I'm living in and I know you're going to cry.” As much as Umar RA was a zahid himself and a sadiq himself. Umar RA hated to see other people suffer the way that he suffered and that started with the Prophet SAW, when he saw the difficulty that the Prophet SAW lived with. So what then when he sees his companions, and when he sees people that he knows their virtue, Umar RA would always shed tears. So when he goes to the house of Abu Ubaidah, he walks in and he sees no furniture, no possessions, except for one pot that he would cook with, one pillow, and he had a few broken pieces of food that he would sustain himself with a little bit of bread and some nuts and that was it. 

So as soon as Umar RA walked in and he saw the house of Abu Ubaidah, the leader of greater Syria, he started to cry, and Abu Ubaidah says to him, “I told you that your eyes are going to shed tears of me. It's enough for you to just know what comes to you from me.” Meaning, you don't need to worry about me, and at the same time don't hurt yourself by coming and seeing the difficulty with which I live. And Umar RA said that, “The world changed all of us except for you Abu Ubaidah.” What a powerful statement to come from Umar RA. You remained intact from everything that came to you of this world, remained focused and upon the mission of the Prophet SAW. When Umar RA was in Medina, and Medina suffered under what's known as the year of the ashes, Abu Ubaidah RA also played a serious role in alleviating some of the suffering of this ummah under the famine that struck Medina. And he sent from ash-sham to the Muslims in Medina about 4,000 camel loads of food to try to avert the harm that had taken place with them. So then what happens to Abu Ubaidah RA, the plague breaks out and before COVID started, we didn't know the severity of COVID. I gave a lecture, a break from The Firsts, about the plague of Amwas. Abu Ubaidah had come to meet Umar outside of greater Syria, and as they were meeting outside of ash-sham on the border, the news came to them that the plague had struck and that people were dying right and left, and so the discussion then becomes should Umar RA proceed to ash-sham or should he turn back. 

So Umar RA he asks for shura from the people, and then Umar RA basically dismisses everyone except for the people of Badr. I want to take the shura of the earliest Muslims and the scholars amongst them to know what I should do. So Umar RA is deliberating whether or not he should enter into ash-sham during that plague. Most of them said to Umar RA that he should return to Medina, and some of them said go ahead. So eventually Umar RA comes out and he decides that he's going to return to Medina. Abu Ubaidah when he hears that, he says to Umar the famous words, “Are you fleeing from the decree of Allah, oh Umar?” and Umar RA says I wish someone other than you Abu Ubaidah said that because I love him so much and I don't want to disagree with him and I wish it would have come from someone other than him. So he said to Abu Ubaidah, “We're fleeing from the decree of Allah to the decree of Allah.” And Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA intervenes, and he said, “I have heard from the Prophet SAW directly that the Prophet SAW said that if you hear of a plague that breaks out in the land, do not enter it, but if the plague breaks out while you are in that land, then do not leave it.” So the famous hadith that has been cited so much over the past year about quarantining and things of that sort, so this is the context of that, this discussion between Umar and Abu Ubaidah. 

So Umar and his group went back to Medina. Abu Ubaidah and his group went back to Ash-Sham. And the plague then started to ravage more people and Umar RA was worried about some of his sahaba that were still there and at the top of that list was Abu Ubaidah RA. So he sends a letter to Abu Ubaidah RA and he says to Abu Ubaidah in that letter, he says, “Look, I need something from you. So when my letter comes to you, then approach me in Medina.” Abu Ubaidah RA, he immediately said Umar RA does not need me. This is what's implied here is that he just wants me to get away from the plague. Umar wants to rescue Abu Ubaidah because he knows how important he is to the ummah and Abu Ubaidah RA responds to Umar RA with a beautiful letter and in it he says, “Look, I'm not going to leave my army behind. I will stay with them, and I'm pleased with the decree of my Lord. If I die in this plague, it's shahada, and I will be okay. So excuse me, and allow me.” He didn't want to disobey the orders of Umar RA, but he knew what Umar was doing. He said excuse me, and let me stay with my army and I'm pleased with the decree of Allah, and if I die in this plague, then it is shahada. Abu Ubaidah is the one who narrates the famous hadith that if a person dies from a plague, that they're a martyr. So when Umar RA is waiting for the response of Abu Ubaidah, when he gets that letter, he immediately starts to cry and as he's weeping, the people thought that it might be that Abu Ubaidah died so they say to Umar RA, “Did Abu Ubaidah die?” and Umar RA, he responded, “Not yet, but not much longer. It's only a matter of time before he'll pass away.” 

Then Umar RA responds to the letter, and he tells Abu Ubaidah to at least find a place that is secure and that's elevated so that the worst of the plague will not strike him, and so Abu Ubaidah RA calls for Abu Musa al-Ashari. They try to find a place. Abu Musa RA gets home and finds that his wife is struck with the plague. Abu Ubaidah RA takes his camel, starts to look for a place, and then he also struck by the plague and the people rushed to their leader, to Abu Ubaidah RA, who is the head of them all, he's the leader of Ash-Sham. And as they surround him and he's dying, he says to them that, “Indeed, Allah SWT has written upon the child of Adam death. And so all of us will die, and the smartest amongst us is the one who is most humble to their Lord, or who obeys their Lord most, and who works towards the hereafter, or to the inevitable most.” And there is a long beautiful wasiah of Abu Ubaidah RA reminding the people to remember Allah SWT to hold on to their deeds. And then Abu Ubaidah RA appoints Mu'adh ibn Jabal RA, his brother in the hijrah, and he dies. And when he dies, the people weep over the death of their leader of Abu Ubaidah al-Jarrah RA. And Mu'adh RA, he cries, and he says a man who was truthful to his Lord, trustworthy, and Allah SWT was great in his heart RA.

And when Umar RA found out, he wept out of his love for him and he said, if Abu Ubaidah was alive, this is as high of a praise that you'll get from Umar RA. He said, “If Abu Ubaidah had lived, I would have appointed him to this affair.” Meaning I would have appointed him to the khilafah, and I would have met my Lord in peace like I would. Not every khalifah is carrying the stress of who they're going to appoint after them. He said if he had made it if he hadn't have died before me, I would have appointed him and I would have met Allah in peace knowing that I made the right decision, for the Prophet SAW said every ummah has an ameen and the ameen of this ummah is Abu Ubaidah RA. And I want to end with one narration about our beloved companion that we've spoken about tonight, Abu Ubaidah RA, and that is once again an incident with Umar RA. Umar RA was sitting with a group of companions, and he said to them, “Make a wish.” And the companions started to respond. One of them said, “I wish to have as much gold to fill this entire place so that I could spend it all in the path of Allah SWT.” Umar RA says again, “Make a wish.” And another man says, “I wish that this place were full of jewels and gems and pearls so that I could spend it all for the sake of Allah SWT.” And Umar RA said, “Make a wish.” And the companions respond, and they say at that point, “We don't know what to say, oh commander of the believers.” Meaning we don't want anything of this world if we took anything from this world. We would wish for it just to spend it and use it for the sake of Allah SWT. And then Umar RA says, “As for me, I wish that this place, I had a room full of men like Abu Ubaidah Al-Jarrah.” If I could have a room full of this man, then that's better than all the gold of this world and everything that this world possesses, meaning the quality of people. In one narration, he also said Mu'adh and Salim Mawla Abi Hudhaifa. If I could have a room of Abu Ubaidahs, I would be good, then this ummah would be in goodness, which shows you the value of these people that what these people brought to us, particularly people like Abu Ubaidah Al-Jarrah. What they did for us could not be quantified in any way, not in the way that it was gained nor in the way that it was spent, and that is Abu Ubaidah Al-Jarrah in the eyes of the Prophet SAW and Abu Bakr and Umar, may Allah be pleased with them all. And so what should he be in our eyes RA? A man that was promised paradise by the Prophet SAW, amongst the ten, may Allah be pleased with him. JazakumAllahu Khayran Wasalamualikoum Warahmatullahi Wabarakatuh.

