As-salamu alaykum wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh. The companion that we're talking about today is directly tied to of course sadaqah. He is absolutely one of my favourite companions of the Prophet SAW. Now, Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA, I guarantee you that there is so much that you don't know about him beyond the Sadaqah and I want to start with his background as we do with every companion of the Prophet SAW that we cover. 

First and foremost, before Islam his name was not Abdurrahman but it was Abdu Amr or Abdul Ka'ba, and we know that the Prophet SAW used to change the names of those who had names that were contradictory to Islam. He would not change everyone's name when they became Muslim, but if there was something inherently negative about their name, something that was pessimistic, had a bad meaning or included being a servant to anyone but Allah SWT, then the Prophet SAW would change your name. And Rasulullah SAW gave him the most beloved of names to Allah, as he said SAW that the most beloved of names to Allah are Abdurrahman and Abdullah. So he named him SAW Abdurrahman, and his nickname was Abu Muhammad. So we are here with Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA, Abu Muhammad, a wealthy, exceedingly handsome, dignified, pleasant man. If you looked at Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA, everything about him was stunning, and that was something that would even continue beyond Islam. And of course, he would be even more beautified by his Islam, by his faith. 

As far as his tribe is concerned, he is also from the tribe of Banu Zuhra, and we know that this was the tribe of Saad ibn Abi Waqqas RA, and this was also the tribe of the mother of the Prophet SAW, Amina bint Wahab. So two of the ten promised paradise are related to the Prophet SAW through his mother by being from Banu Zuhra. So it's a powerful tribe, and that's of course where his father is from. His mother her name is Ash-Shifa, and we don't have much about her. She is from the children of Abd ibn Harith. as far as his connection to other tribes is concerned, we know that Abdurrahman was married to multiple women before Islam, and this connected him to multiple tribes within Quraish. So he had a powerful position, and of course he was extremely wealthy, and he is one of those who accepted Islam at the hands of Abu Bakr as-Siddiq RA. So since we are now on the ninth of the ten promised paradise within this series, let's summarize how many of them belonged to Abu Bakr RA. So we have Abu Bakr himself, obviously, we have Talha, Az-Zubair, Uthman ibn Affan, Saad ibn Abi Waqqas, Abdurrahman ibn Auf, and some of the narrations suggest Abu Ubaidah whom we talked about last week, may Allah SWT be pleased with them all. So Abu Bakr RA accounts for more than half of the ten promised paradise, and it also shows the wisdom and the positioning of Abu Bakr that when these people heard about the Prophet SAW, many of them went to Abu Bakr RA. So he was searching for people to tell them about the Prophet SAW, and people were going to him, knowing his wisdom RA and his positioning in society and his closeness to the Prophet SAW. 

Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA has the unique experience of meeting a monk not in Syria but meeting a monk in Yemen. Now remember you had the winter trip, and you had the summer trip that Allah talks about. That were the famous trade routes of the people of Mecca and so you have all of these stories of these sahaba meeting monks, people that were particularly Christian monks that were awaiting or speaking about the coming of a Prophet from Mecca. And they would come back, and they would find that the Prophet SAW had come out. In the case of Abdurrahman ibn Auf, he was in Yemen on a business trip, and he was a famous merchant. And while he was in Yemen, and he was with one of the seniors in Yemen, this elder in Yemen introduced him to a monk, and when he introduced himself to the monk, the monk said, “Where are you from?” He said, “I'm from Mecca.” and he said, “What are you here for?” He said, “I'm here to buy and sell, I'm a merchant.” Listen to what the monk said to him. He said, “Shall I not give you a glad tiding that is greater than any type of trade that you can do over here?” and he said, “What is the glad tidings that's greater than my trade?” He said, “A man that will arise from where you just left that receives revelation from the Lord of the heavens and the earth, and that is the continuation of the way of Jesus, peace be upon him.” So Abdurrahman Ibn Auf RA, he comes back to Mecca and  just like many of the others, he goes to Abu Bakr RA, who was a close friend of his, and he told Abu Bakr what happened, and he asked Abu Bakr, “Have you heard anything?” He said, “Indeed, it is Muhammad Ibn Abdullah. It is Muhammad SAW.” And he took me to the home of Khadija RA that day to embrace Islam. So Abdurrahman Ibn Auf is again one of the first 10 or 15 to accept Islam before Dar al-Arqam, and who would know the Prophet SAW before the Prophet SAW would formally start to gather the people and teach them. And he became one of the students of Dar al-Arqam as well. 

One of the things about him is that he maintained his trade routes. He stayed under the radar in Mecca, but he was persecuted, and we see that Abdurrahman Ibn Auf was one of those who made the first migration to Abyssinia and then came back, and he stayed back in Mecca until the migration to Al-Madinah. So last week we talked about Abu Ubaidah RA, who only made the second migration to Abyssinia, and this week we talk about Abdurrahman Ibn Auf, who only made the first migration to Abyssinia and came back and spent time with the Prophet SAW and waited until the order to migrate to Al-Madinah. Hence, he also becomes one of those who have the distinction of being from the people of the two Hijras, the people who migrated twice for the sake of Allah SWT. And probably his most famous story with the Ansar of the Prophet SAW and it might be the most famous story of how the Prophet SAW paired off the Ansar and the Muhajireen, is a story between him and his brother Saad Ibn Rabir. So, as we know, when those who migrated from Mecca came to Madinah, the Prophet SAW paired off everyone with a brother from the Ansar, and that brother from the Ansar was to take one of the Muhajireen in and was to care for them and to help them get settled in Al-Madinah. Abdurrahman Ibn Auf, who is used to being a wealthy businessman, who is successful his entire life, was extremely sharp, he was a hard worker, he was very determined, and he knew how to take care of himself. So he's in a vulnerable situation, being a refugee fleeing persecution in Mecca, and he's with this man whom he doesn't know. 

And Saad says to him, “Oh my brother, I am the richest of the people of Madinah.” Now, by the way, I want to stop here because this is something that's often not spoken about: the Prophet SAW had a wisdom for everyone that he paired off with in Madinah. So it wasn't a random pairing off, and you see the wisdom when you start to study the personalities from the Ansar and how they match up with the personalities of the Muhajireen, and so Saad was clearly a wealthy man in Madinah. He says, “I am amongst the wealthiest of Madinah, I have two of everything, and you can take anything that you want. I have two gardens, you can take whichever one of the two gardens that's pleasing to you.” And he starts to split his wealth, he says, “This is my wealth, take half of my wealth.” And he gets to the point where he says that I'm married to two women and he said whichever one that you would like to be married to and of course this is not the advice of the Prophet SAW, but this is just speaking to what Saad was saying to him he said whichever one that you want to be married to, I'll go through the process, I'll get divorced and then after she finishes whatever waiting period and she becomes halal for you to marry, then you can marry her instead. And Abdurrahman is looking at him and he's offering all these things and Abdurrahman was embarrassed by his words, his generosity, obviously, and his words and the way that he's telling him, look, I'm in charge, I'm taking care of you, whatever it is that you want. So Abdurrahman says to him, “May Allah bless you with your family and with your wealth. But I have no need for any of that.” He said, “However, just show me where the marketplace is.” 

Now the marketplace was extremely hostile, this is not easy for someone to just make their way into the marketplace, especially as a Meccan and to suddenly make their way. I mean, he's still a refugee. He hasn't even got his feet wet; he doesn't understand Medina yet, but Abdurrahman ibn Auf says just show me where the marketplace is, I will take care of myself. I'll make my own money, and you don't have to worry about me. So he told Sa'ad I want nothing from you. I need to take care of myself. Now the marketplaces were controlled based on what they would sell. So some of the marketplaces were under the tribe of some of the Jewish tribes that used to exist in Medina. Some of them were under certain tribes that might have been hostile to the Muslims, so he's looking at these different marketplaces and he's saying okay let me see if I can wiggle my way in the souq of Banu Qurayza, the souq of Banu Qaynuqa, all of these different marketplaces. So he goes in there and he studies it. I mean he is a businessman RA, a brilliant businessman. So he first starts off with what is easiest for him to acquire, but if he obviously packages it the right way, then he can start to make a living with that. So he starts off with selling yogurt and butter and dates, whatever he can acquire, he starts to do that. And what he would do, obviously, if you think about the way that food is sold, a lot of it is just about the recipes, putting them together, so he would do things that were popular to the people. So he would mix the yogurt and the butter and the dates, he would make different things with that, the famous dish which is known as hays, where you put it all together and he started to sell that. And he did well for himself. Then he worked up enough money RA to start trading in horses, and he knew horses from his time in Mecca. Then as he started to trade horses, Abdurrahman ibn Auf started to sell horse saddles.

So he's getting more and more wealthy in Medina even though he's new to the place. Abdurrahman ibn Auf was just brilliant like that. And he said that you know, there was a time that I could literally look at a stone and I could turn over any stone and I would find gold under it. I mean he's talking about his own ability and how Allah blessed him to be able to make something out of nothing when it came to business. So it didn't take him long to have enough money to get married and start his new life in Medina. So he goes to the Prophet SAW and the description of it in this narration is that the scent of perfume was all over him. He was dressed nicely, I mean he's coming to the Prophet SAW looking happy and handsome. And the Prophet SAW looked at him and he said, “What a pleasant surprise oh Abdurrahman. What is it oh Abdurrahman? He said, “O Rasulullah, I've got married. And the Prophet SAW said, “What did you get married with? What did you give her as a mahr?” We just got here and we're just trying to figure out all of these different things. So he said, “I gave her a block of gold.” So the Prophet SAW, he was happy for him obviously pleased, but he said the very famous narration that we use today when we talk about al-walima. He said, “Have a feast even if it is with a single sheep. May Allah SWT bless you in your family and in your wealth.” So Abdurrahman bin Auf being the first of the muhajireen that we know those that migrated from Mecca to have a wedding in Medina and he did it all by himself, meaning he did not take up the generous offer of his sponsor and Sa'ad bin Rabir to take some of his wealth or some of his gardens to be able to do that. 

So this was a man that was extremely wealthy and smart and really self-sufficient in the sense like he did not want anyone to do anything for him RA. And he was not arrogant as a result of his wealth or as a result of his position that he had. Rather we find that he participated in every battle with the Prophet SAW, so he did not take a posture of ‘O Rasulullah, I'm wealthy and I'm not going to go out and battle or get my clothes dirty alongside you.’ Instead we find that he maintained a closeness to the Prophet SAW in battle just like all of the 10 promised paradise. They always found themselves near the Prophet SAW in battle, seeking to protect the messenger SAW. So some of the stories that we have from him in battle, one of them if you remember when we talked about Bilal RA. He was the one that took as a prisoner, Umayyah ibn Khalaf, who of course used to torture Bilal RA and Bilal RA was the one who killed Umayyah ibn Khalaf. And of course, if you remember Abdurahman ibn Auf's sister, Hind, was married to Bilal. So Bilal RA was the brother-in-law of Abdurahman ibn Auf RA. We also see that in Uhud, he was one of those that stayed the course, and while he did not suffer the wounds of Talha RA or lose his teeth the way that Abu Ubaidah RA lost his teeth biting out the helmet that was driven into the face of the Prophet SAW, Abdurahman ibn Auf suffered over 20 wounds on the day of Uhud. And some of them were so severe in his leg that he would limp for the rest of his life because of the wounds that he suffered in Uhud, in the companionship of the Prophet SAW. 

And we also find that once, as the Prophet SAW was preparing to dispatch a force, a mission, and Rasulullah SAW asked for people to sponsor it, that Abdurahman ibn Auf goes home and he brings back 2,000 coins for the Prophet SAW and Rasulullah SAW says, “What have you left behind?” He said, “O Rasulullah, I give 2,000 for the sake of Allah and I left 2,000 for my family.” So giving half of your wealth for an expedition is pretty significant and this is something that he constantly would do with the Prophet SAW in multiple expeditions. The only one that would outdo him in giving for the sake of Allah SWT in those expeditions was none other than Uthman ibn Affan RA. And we see that the Prophet SAW actually appointed him to lead one of those missions, and something significant that happened and this was the fifth year of Hijrah that as the Prophet SAW was dispatching him, the Prophet SAW took a turban and he wrapped the head of Abdurahman ibn Auf himself. I mean just think of the scene and as he wrapped the head of Abdurahman ibn Auf, he put his hand on his head RA, and he made dua for him and as he made dua for him, he advised him to have taqwa, as the Prophet SAW would always do when he sends someone out on a military mission. He advises them to be pious, to be mindful of Allah SWT and that means on a personal level, to always be in a state of preparation to meet your Lord and also to be mindful of Allah, to not transgress because a lot of things happen in the capacity of battle, and the Muslims have to abide by a certain level of ethic. 

So he put his hand on the head of Abdurahman ibn Auf, the turban that he wrapped himself on his head and the Prophet SAW made dua for him. He advised him to have taqwa, he advised him to praise Allah SWT for everything that comes his way and then he told them something very interesting. He said, “Listen, when you get to those people, invite them to Islam. And if Allah SWT gives you victory, then propose to the daughter of the chief of the tribe.” This was a very specific advice that the Prophet SAW gave to him,, and of course this was a way of softening the hearts of tribes that were hostile and bringing people together. So the Prophet SAW gave him that advice. So Abdurahman ibn Auf did what he was told and he married the daughter of the chief of the tribe and through that marriage, his most prominent son was born, and that was Abu Salama ibn Abdurahman ibn Auf, who would go on to become one of the seven jurists of Medina who were famous. The most famous seven scholars of the tabi'een in Medina, a student of the greatest of the companions of the Prophet SAW, a student of Aisha RA. Just one example by the way, is that Abu Salama ibn Abdurahman was the one who asked Aisha RA to describe the prayer of the Prophet SAW to him. So you think about how crucial the role he plays in the transmission of the religion, and it came from this marriage that the Prophet SAW gave him advice and told him RA to marry the daughter of the chief of that tribe. 

We also find that the famous hadith where the Prophet SAW said, “Do not curse or revile my companions for if one of you were to spend as much gold as Uhud, it would not amount to as much as a handful that one of them spent for the sake of Allah SWT, or even half of it.” And the context of this hadith was actually that an argument took place between Khalid RA and Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA. And Khalid RA was new to Islam and Khalid RA said some words to Abdurrahman ibn Auf as they were arguing in the wake of a battle, and the Prophet SAW was saying to Khalid RA, “Do not curse my companions or abuse my companions.” So of course, for us, this applies to all of the sahaba of the Prophet SAW, but when the Prophet SAW spoke to the sahaba, there were of course degrees amongst the sahaba and the Prophet SAW always gave preference to the firsts and those that came to Islam early on. The Prophet SAW judged people in accordance with that and the Prophet SAW even told Khalid RA, do not abuse my companions, that you cannot reach the rank of a person like Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA. 

There are other narrations about his virtues and they are plentiful and I'll go through some of my favourite and I could literally go all night talking about Abdurrahman ibn Auf, and how the companions spoke about this man that was so generous with his wealth and generous with his heart and generous with his spirit. One of them is the narration of Talha ibn Ubaidillah RA, and I hope you remember that Talha RA was Talha al-khayr, Talha al-jud. He was known for his generosity too. So the generous know the generous. They compete with each other for goodness and Talha RA was someone that would look for people to give charity to. And listen to what he says about Abdurrahman ibn Auf. He said, “All of the people of Medina lived off of Abdurrahman ibn Auf’s sadaqa in some way.” He said, “One third of the people had debts that they owed to others and Abdurrahman ibn Auf paid them off.” So that's one way, if you were burdened by debt, you were one-third of Medina, and you owed someone else money, Abdurrahman ibn Auf would pay off your debt for you. He said one-third of the debts were owed to him, and Abdurrahman ibn Auf forgave them. So one-third he paid off in terms of debts to others, one-third were debts that were owed to him and he forgave them. And he said one-third was the sadaqa that he gave to people in Medina and he never looked to that person for any repayment again. So he said everyone in Medina was somehow living off the sadaqa of this man and the only one that would beat him at times was again Uthman ibn Affan RA. 

So the famous story of Jaysh al Usra, which was a difficult campaign where the Prophet SAW asked who would come forward, and Uthman RA came forward with the most, we see that Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA donated 20 or 200 pounds of gold in Jaysh al Usra. So there's a narration that says 20, one that says 200. The point is he donated a whole lot of money when the Prophet SAW asked who would finance that campaign. 

And then, listen to this narration. Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA is the only person that the Prophet SAW confirmed prayed salah behind. Why do I say that, because there's difference of opinion when the Prophet SAW was dying and he came out for his last salah, if Abu Bakr RA took the imama or the Prophet SAW continued to be the imam. But they were situated in a way where Abu Bakr RA remained the imam, the Prophet SAW was so sick that he came out and sat next to Abu Bakr. There's a difference of opinion about whether Abu Bakr RA led him or the Prophet SAW assumed the imam from Abu Bakr as-Siddiq RA. As for Abdurrahman ibn Auf, he's the only person that we know from the companions of the Prophet SAW that the Prophet SAW prayed and did sujood behind while he was fully healthy. What's the context of this? It was actually in Tabuk, and Bilal RA looked around he used to go to the Prophet SAW to ask the Prophet SAW if he should do the adhan, the Prophet SAW would give him the permission, he'd go make the adhan and then the Prophet SAW would come and lead the companions in prayer. This time, the Prophet SAW was nowhere to be found and as they looked around, they realized that the Prophet SAW had gone far away at that point and they did not want to risk the timing of the salah. 

So Bilal RA and those that were there, appointed Abdurrahman ibn Auf to lead the salah, which tells you about his position in the first place. So Bilal got up, he did the adhan and the iqama, Abdurrahman ibn Auf began to lead the salah. Now the Prophet SAW came upon them while they were praying in congegration, this is an unprecedented situation. I know that it sounds self-explanatory that the Prophet SAW will just pray behind them, but he had never prayed behind anyone before SAW. So the Prophet SAW just assumes a position, it was dark, he just assumes a position and he prays catching the second rak'ah behind Abdurrahman ibn Auf. And this is, I'm going to read the narration in Arabic because it's so beautiful. As the Prophet SAW stood up to pray his last rak'ah. So imagine you're in salah, and you look, and the Prophet SAW stood up to pray another rak'ah, so everyone was terrified. They did not know what to do and so the Muslims were just completely overwhelmed. They didn't know what to do so they started to say like, they thought they messed up because the Prophet SAW did not lead them in salah, he prayed behind Abdurrahman ibn Auf. And that one rak'ah of the Prophet SAW, can you imagine how long it was to Abdurrahman ibn Auf who doesn't know if he sinned at this point or if he made a mistake so the Prophet SAW finished his salah, he looked towards them and the Prophet SAW said, “You did well.” 

So he put them at ease SAW and he once again reaffirmed SAW that you pray your prayers on time, so you did well. So this was an honour that Allah bestowed upon Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA, that he would lead the Prophet SAW in salah. Now, after the death of the Prophet SAW, we also see that Abdurrahman continued to play an important role in the community. He was entrusted by Umar ibn Khattab RA and taken into shura by Abu Bakr as-Siddiq RA. And there are very specific ways that his generosity continues to shine. For one, Abdurrahman ibn Auf used to take care of our mothers. He used to take care of the wives of the Prophet SAW. He took it upon himself to be the sole provider of the wives of the Prophet SAW after the Prophet SAW passed away. And that's something that's just extremely beautiful that you take it upon yourself to say our mothers and think about your blood mother, someone who took care of your mother. These are our mothers, the wives of the Prophet SAW, and this is the man who said I will care for all of them. They never have to worry about their finances again, it is on me. And it was so well known to the Muslims that Abdurrahman is the one who provides for them, that anytime he sold something, and he got a portion of it, then he gave a portion of it to the wives of the Prophet SAW, whether it was a big transaction or a small transaction. A part of his salary went to the widows, the wives of the Prophet SAW, our mothers in particular.

There is a narration that one time, he sold a piece of land for forty thousand dinars and he distributed the entire amount among the Banu Zuhra, who were the relatives of the Prophet SAW’s mother,, and among the Prophet SAW wives, and the poor amongst the Muslims, and Aisha RA received that huge amount of money. And she said, “Who sent this money?” They said, “It's Abdurrahman.” And Aisha RA remembered that the Prophet SAW said that, “Oh Aisha, no one will feel compassion towards you after I die except for the righteous.” Meaning only a righteous person will rise to the occasion to take care of the wives of the Prophet SAW after he passes away, and that was Abdurrahman ibn Auf. He has the distinction as well of accompanying the Prophet SAW wives on Hajj. So he was in charge of taking the wives of the Prophet SAW on Hajj, and that is just such a beautiful distinction that belongs to him that he can meet Allah SWT with. 

There's also of course a very famous story of Abdurrahman ibn Auf on his caravan coming back to Medina. When he would come back from his trade routes, it was always a scene because his camels were loaded with all sorts of goods. And so one day, he came back from a trade route, and it literally was so loud that the city of Medina started to rumble to where people thought that they were under attack. There were clouds of dust and the wind was blowing the sand, and the people of Medina thought that maybe we're under attack, and instead, what it turned out to be was Abdurrahman ibn Auf's caravan coming back and it was 700 camels, all filled with goods  coming into the streets of Al Medina. And Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA, as he was doing that, Aisha RA asked, “What's happening?” And they said, “It's the caravan of Abdurrahman ibn Auf. He just came back from Ash-Sham, and this is his merchandise. This is all that he gained.” And she said, “All of this from one caravan?” And they said, “Ya umul mu'mineen, there's 700 camels.” And she made the dua for Abdurrahman ibn Auf. There are some narrations that indicate the Prophet SAW made this dua for him as well. She said, “Oh Allah, allow him to drink from the water of salsabil.” which is a specific spring in paradise. What a beautiful dua, just as he has distinguished in his trade and in his spending for the sake of Allah, that let him be distinguished in gaining this particular gift of Jannah and drinking from the spring of salsabil. 

You find multiple narrations though, about how uncomfortable he was with his wealth, and this is from his asceticism, and these narrations are extremely powerful. One of them, he said RA, “We were tested with hardship with the messenger SAW and we were patient, but then we were tested with ease and prosperity after the prophet SAW's death and we were not patient.” What is he talking about? The first type of patience is the patience of hardship, and that is when something happens to you, you're tested by Allah, and you are patient in your response. The second type of patience is the patience of desires, and he's saying that it was much easier to survive adversity than it was prosperity because in prosperity, we had a hard time keeping to our promise with Allah and our covenant with Allah. And that was from his asceticism that he was always spending for the sake of Allah out of fear that he had betrayed that covenant with the Prophet SAW. 

There's another narration and  listen closely, “Oh ummah, this is to the ummah of Muhammad SAW that the prophet SAW said if the treasures of Persia and Rome are open for you, what kind of people will you become?” And Abdurrahman ibn Auf said, “Oh Rasulullah, we will be as Allah commanded us. We're going to stay upon the covenant.” And the prophet SAW said, “It may be that you become something else, you become unrecognizable because of the wealth that enters upon you. You will compete with each other and then you will envy each other and then you will turn on each other and then you will hate each other.” This is such a message from the Prophet SAW because he said, “I'm not afraid of poverty for you, oh ummah, I'm afraid that the doors of wealth open to you and you kill each other over that wealth.” So he said to them SAW, particularly Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA said, “Oh Rasulullah, we'll stay upon that which Allah commanded us.” He said, It's not like that, that unfortunately as the rich are open to you, first you compete with each other and then you envy one another and then you turn on each other and then you hate one another. May Allah SWT protect us from being of that prophecy. 

There's another narration that Abdurrahman ibn Auf reported that the Prophet SAW said that Shaytan has said that the owner of wealth, the one who possesses great wealth, will never be safe from me by one of three ways. Either I will get them to take money without permission, like they basically take money and wrong, or I will get them to spend it without their right, or I will make it so beloved to that person that he obstructs its rightful use. So, either they earn wrong or they spend wrong, or they become so intoxicated with wealth that they obstruct its being spent right. So the Prophet SAW says that Shaytan says in this, narrated by Abdurrahman ibn Auf, that I will be able to penetrate the one who has much wealth through one of these three directions. 

So Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA was extremely cautious about the wealth that he had and one of the things that's narrated about him, you might remember this from prayers of the pious, that Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA was seen making tawaf around the Kaaba and the only dua he made the entire time “Oh Allah protect me from the greed of my soul.” So he was afraid for the wealth that he had, and that's why it is narrated that Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA, despite his great wealth and the large caravans that you could not distinguish him in a gathering from the poorest of servants because of his asceticism. And there's another narration that Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA, it's in Al Bukhari, that one time someone gave him some food and he was fasting, and he started to cry. He said, “Hamza RA was killed, and he did not have enough to even cover him in a kafan except for one garment. And Mus'ab was killed, and he had nothing to cover him at his death except for the garment that he had for his death. I am afraid that we are amongst those for whom the goodness of this world or for whom our reward has been hastened in this world.”
Meaning what is left for us is the punishment of the hereafter. By the way this is a man who was promised paradise on multiple occasions, and he would cry because he would think about those who suffered, who he felt like were better than him, and who better than the Prophet SAW. 

And so there's another narration very similar. That one time someone served him an extravagant meal of bread and meat and so he started to cry, and he said that the Prophet SAW passed away from this world and he and his family never once got to eat to their fill of bread or barley just to have the basics of this world, they never got it SAW. So this was Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA and the fear that he had. Because of all that, Allah SWT had given to him some of the other stations of Abdurrahman ibn Auf. One of them is that, of course, as we talked about with Abu Ubaidah al-Jarrah, he was the one who solved the discussion about how Muslims should act in the case of a plague. In the plague of Amwas, he was the one who intervened in the argument between Umar RA and Abu Ubaidah RA, when he said, “Are you running away from the decree of Allah SWT by fleeing from the plague?” And Umar RA said, “We are fleeing from the decree of Allah to the decree of Allah.” Meaning we are not being reckless, we are showing tawakkul, and this is how we show tawakkul by taking the means we trust Allah SWT. And it was Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA said, “I heard from the Prophet SAW, that if a person is in a land and plague breaks out, they should not leave it, and if they are not in that land, then they should not go to it.” So it was he who intervened in that regard. We also find that one of the rulings of accepting jizya from the Zoroastrians was also taken from Abdurrahman ibn Auf, who said, “I heard it from the Prophet SAW and saw it from the Prophet SAW.” So the ruling of jizya from Ahlul Kitab was not specific to Ahlul Kitab, but applied to these other religious communities as well, that they would be protected under the jizya. 

And then, finally, when we come to his death RA, we come to his role in the khilafah of Umar RA and then Uthman RA in the appointment of the khalifah. And so it starts with Umar RA as Umar appointed his shura, and it was the six people left of the ten promised paradise, with the exception of S’eed ibn Zayd, due to him being a relative. Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA was particularly instrumental in what would transpire next and Al-Dhahabi, he actually says that it is from the greatest of his virtues was the way he handled himself on the shura of Umar RA in choosing the next khalifah. Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA immediately disqualified himself from being the khalifah and instead, he waited out to see who he would give his vote to in choosing the next khalifah. And when it came down to his vote, Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA went through the streets of the ummah and he did shura, I mean he consulted the men, the women, and even the children, asking them who should be the khalifah, should it be Uthman RA or should it be Ali RA. And after all of that consultation, he made his decision and he gave his vote to Uthman RA. And Uthman RA became the khalifah. 

Now, in the time of Uthman RA, it's important to remember that any one of these 10 promised paradise had a claim to khalifah, right? I mean, they're all in this illustrious category of being from the 10 that were promised paradise, and one of the narrations is that Uthman RA once became sick, and he wrote in his will that if he passed away in this illness that Abdurrahman ibn Auf would be his successor. So it could have been that Abdurrahman ibn Auf was going to be the khalifah of the Muslims and of course Abdurrahman ibn Auf had a very similar personality to Uthman RA, known for his generosity yet his great modesty and humility and so when the man heard, Hamran was his name, he heard that Uthman RA ordered that, he went to Abdurrahman ibn Auf in the masjid, he said “Glad tidings.” He said, “What is it?” He said, “Uthman has written that you will succeed him.” And Abdurrahman ibn Auf went between the grave of the Prophet SAW and the minbar of the Prophet SAW, meaning he's in the Rawdah. And he said, “Oh Allah, if it is indeed that Uthman RA has entrusted me with this matter, let me die before he dies.” I mean that's powerful, right? Like he immediately said, “Oh Allah, if that's the case, if I'm going to be his successor, let me die before he dies. I don't want to be tested with that responsibility.” 

And he did not live except for a few months after that, and he passed away due to natural causes before the fitnah would break out. And before he passed away, he had this dream the night before he passed away and, in his dream, he looks behind him and the entire ummah is behind him. So it's an interesting dream that he shared with some of the companion before he passed away, and Ali ibn Abi Talib RA describes the scene of his janaza. He said that it was like the whole ummah came to the janaza of Abdurrahman ibn Auf. You know, you think about that. How many people were standing in that janaza that Abdurrahman ibn Auf had helped, right? If all of Medina used to depend upon him in some way, how many people felt truly indebted to him? You know, when someone passes away, you hope that they don't owe anyone anything. You don't find anything of Abdurrahman ibn Auf owing anyone anything or hurting anyone and so Ali RA, he's looking out at the janaza of Abdurrahman ibn Auf and he says it's like everybody was there and we know the hadith of the Prophet SAW that when the people testify as you are passing away that if they say good about you, that jannah has become mandatory and the opposite is also true. And Ali RA looking out at the janaza of Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA, he said those words, he said, “What a sign, like this is Jannah being mandatory for him.” 

And so Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA passed away at the age of about 75 years old and before he died, he liberated, they say, hundreds or even thousands of slaves. He donated so much money to everyone who was around. Look at how he willed what he still had. He willed 400 dinars of gold for each veteran of Badr who was still alive. Because he loved the people of Badr, because the Prophet SAW loved the veterans of Badr. They were the best of the companions. So he willed that whoever was still alive from the veterans of Badr, they take 400 dinars. And then he willed for ummahat al-mu'mineen a huge share of money for those that were left from the widows, the wives of the Prophet SAW, a huge share of money. And they say that it was up to over 400,000. I mean he willed so much money and there are different numbers that are there. But he divided so much of his money with the wives of the Prophet SAW that were left behind. And all of that and his family, his actual inheritors, still had a lot of money that was left behind for them. Even though he spent so much in the path of Allah. And Ali RA, he said, “May Allah have mercy on you, Abu Muhammad. You attained the goodness of the world, but you overcame its deception. You were never deluded by this world.” 

And I want to end with this hadith from the Prophet SAW as we go into Ramadan. Rasulullah SAW said, “That the one who eats and is grateful is just like a person who fasts and is patient.” Being a person who is grateful and has is just like a person who is restrained and they're patient. Because it's the same thing that inspires gratitude, that inspires patience. And that's the connection to Allah SWT that helps you see through all ease and through all hardship, that you should remain connected to Allah SWT. And I want to address, actually one narration. That's a very common narration that gets quoted about Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA. And that is that Aisha RA said that I heard the Prophet SAW say that Abdurrahman ibn Auf would enter into Jannah crawling. And that Abdurrahman ibn Auf cried, and he said, but I want to enter Jannah standing, I want to enter Jannah up front. And this is a very common narration that's quoted in the books. And you know, doing just a little bit of research on it, it seems like there's nothing that is authentic whatsoever about this. The lesson that's usually used in the books is what the Prophet SAW said that the poor would enter into Jannah hundreds of years before the rich. Because of all the accounting that has to be done for the wealthy. And so they say this is what it meant with Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA. 

But as I said with Abu Ubaidah RA, though we don't scrutinize narrations when it comes to seerah the same way we do hadith, when there's something that just seems very contradictory or seems out of place, then it is important to scrutinize. And so there's nothing authentic that says that Abdurrahman ibn Auf RA will enter Jannah crawling or behind or anything like that. Rather, what we see is that he is from as-sabiqun al-awwalun, and he shows us that your wealth does not have to become a distraction between you and Allah SWT. It does not have to hold you back. Rather, if you are generous and grateful that you will have that position with Allah and with the Messenger SAW. May Allah be pleased with him and all that he gave to this ummah. And I'll end with one narration that connects him to Abu Ubaidah RA. And that is that he was known as the trustworthy one upon the wives of the Prophet RA. This is narrated by Zubair ibn Bakar. He was the one entrusted with the wives of the Prophet RA, and Abu Ubaidah RA was the ameen of this ummah. So you see this beautiful distinction that's given to him, and surely we benefit from him until today, and we ask Allah to make that from their good deeds. JazakumAllahu khayran. BarakAllahu feekum. Asalaamu alaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh.

