Tonight is a particularly daunting task because the person that I'm covering, Bilal ibn Rabah, is not just an incredible companion, but one whose life story spans so far. And his entire life story, or much of his life story, is related to his accepting Islam. And so a lot of the companions that we've been covering, we stop at a certain point because the idea is to, in many ways, give us an image of Mecca as things are developing around the Prophet SAW. But the story of Bilal is poetic for many reasons. It is one of the most well-known stories in the ummah. There are many children who would not be able to give you any incident from the companions except for the incident of Bilal. He is well known for his struggle, especially as he initially embraced Islam. Now with that being said, there is also a fetishizing of Bilal that we should eliminate from now. If you have not paid attention, most of the companions thus far, or many of them that we have covered, were in fact black. And as one article was titled, Bilal is not the ummah's one black friend. And that's sort of how he's portrayed in many situations, the ummah's one black friend. He's that guy, right? Except we just finished with Khabbab, who was also black, and Sumayya, and Umm Ayman, and Zayd, and the list goes on and on. So that's not his special quality. 

However, there is an element of Bilal overcoming all sorts of impediments in his society, in a classist, tribalistic, racist environment to become who he became. Now, as far as this series is concerned, and again, creating the imagery of what is around the Prophet SAW as Islam is developing, Bilal is always associated with Khabbab. So you'll find in books of seerah, often Bilal and Khabbab together, or you'll find Bilal, Khabbab, and Suhayb together, and sometimes Ammar, Bilal, Khabbab, and Suhayb. And so we haven't covered Suhayb yet, which we will next week. So that's one element that reflects the early downtrodden ones who accepted Islam and struggled alongside the Prophet SAW, to whom this message resonated. And you'll also find, like in Sahih Muslim. Imam Muslim has the virtues of Salman, Bilal, and Suhayb to obviously reflect Salman being the first Persian, Bilal being the first Abyssinian who was enslaved to accept Islam, and Suhayb being the first Roman to accept Islam. So there are different ways that Bilal’s story is framed. But I want us to think about the story of Bilal before Islam, because there's something about the message of the Prophet SAW that is resonating instantaneously with people that have been subjugated in the name of false gods. Whether those false gods are the idols, or those false gods are the various ideologies and systems that are upheld in Mecca through which the Bilals and the Khabbabs and the Ammars and the Sumayyas are oppressed. 

So let's start off with Bilal's story to just reflect for a moment and appreciate that he brings together two important surahs. Bilal's story, as far as his birth and his coming into the picture, starts with Surat al-Fil, and it ends with Surat an-Nasr. How? Surat al-Fil reflects the incidents that would cause his mother to be brought into slavery and then Bilal to be raised in slavery in Mecca. And Surat an-Nasr is encapsulated best by Bilal standing on top of the Ka'bah in Fath Mekkah, in the conquest of Mecca, calling out Allahu Akbar, Allahu Akbar. And so first Bilal comes into the picture. The reason why Bilal grows up in the environment that he grows up in is because an Abyssinian king from Yemen, who of course we know as Abrahah, leads an army from Yemen to destroy the Ka'bah and Allah SWT destroys his army instead. And amongst those that are captive, Bilal’s mother, Hamama, who was an Abyssinian princess. So Hamama is captured as a princess, taken into slavery, and is married to Rabah, who is a black Arab slave. And so this army is destroyed. Abrahah's army, seeking to destroy the Ka'bah, is destroyed. And what ends up happening is that the Abyssinians that resided in the area are taken as slaves, and they largely dwell in such fashion in the society of the Prophet SAW. 

And then again how poetic that the next time an army comes to the Ka'bah, it is the army of the Prophet SAW and Bilal through monotheism, stands on top of the Ka'bah, declaring Allahu Akbar, Allahu Akbar. So Bilal is Bilal ibn Rabah and he is also Bilal al-Habashi. He was born approximately 10 years after the year of the elephant, and of course, the year that the Prophet SAW was born as well. So he was born approximately in the year 580, making him a decade younger than the Prophet SAW. What is the description of Bilal physically? Bilal had an extremely pleasant appearance. He had dark, very dark skin, extremely handsome, he had hazel eyes, he had a lot of hair, and it's said that Bilal never balded, so he had much hair that stayed with him throughout his entire life. He had a light beard that was barely connected, and Bilal maintained a youthful appearance throughout his entire life. They said that there were only some streaks of grey hair in his hair and his beard at the end of his life. So an extremely handsome man, a very strong appearance. 

And I want to introduce this man through an introduction by Sa'eed ibn al-Musayyib, and this narration is found in al-Qurtubi's tafsir in Surah Luqman. That Sa'eed ibn al-Musayyib saw a young black man who had internalized some of the racism that was around him. And so we, just as I said, we can't exoticize Bilal or turn him into the ummah's one black friend. We also should not underestimate the power of people that deal with toxic racism, and racism is all toxic, seeing themselves in the companionship of the Prophet SAW. And so Sa'eed ibn al-Musayyib was talking to a young black man, and he says to him, “Do not feel bad or do not grieve because you are black. For verily three of the best people to ever walk the face of the earth were black. And he mentions Bilal and Mihja and Luqman.” May Allah SWT be pleased with them all. And so Bilal is a special man from the companions of the Prophet SAW, whose honor, even if relegated to one area, lives in the ummah today. And we see the prominence of the story of Bilal and the name of Bilal in the ummah's history. The nickname of Bilal was Aba Abdillah, though he never actually had kids, according to most accounts. And the way that Bilal would be insulted of ‘O son of a black woman’. This was a way to put Bilal down because of his status, despite having an Arab father. Because as we said, Bilal’s mother was an Abyssinian princess and Bilal’s father was a black Arab. And in the famous narration with Abu Dharr saying those words, and of course some of the narrations suggesting that it was Bilal that he said those words to, it would make sense because it was a reminder that even though Bilal’s father was an Arab, his mother being an Abyssinian who was enslaved, is really what his status was reflective of. And so Abu Dharr himself being a black Arab, saying that to Bilal, or the names being hurled at Bilal, the insult, specific insult to Bilal of ‘O son of a black woman’, is to suggest a lower status in society because at the end of the day, tribalism is what reigns supreme in that society. 

Some of the narrations, they talk about the upbringing of Bilal, and they're mostly general, but still, I mean, you can take from the obvious facts of Bilal's upbringing enough to derive what would have made the message of Islam so attractive to him. So Bilal was born into slavery. He grows up and both of his parents are enslaved. And, you know, it's mentioned in some of the, in the accounts that Bilal, who loved his mother, used to witness his mother being beaten. And so just think about the mindset of this young man coming up and seeing his parents subjugated to that cruelty. Now, Bilal understood that the way to rise was to be enhanced in regard to your skill sets, in regard to your techniques, in regard to your abilities. And so Bilal would rise to become one of the favoured of the enslaved due to his intelligence, due to his strength, due to his ability.

So he wasn't amongst those who would be beaten frequently. He was amongst those that were considered to be amongst the favourites of a noble man, noble by jahili standards, Umayyah ibn Khalaf at the time. And so Bilal, despite rising in that sense, understands that his status, because of the way that things operate in the society that he is in, his status is still one of a slave, despite being one of the favoured amongst the slaves of the nobles at the time. Now Bilal embraces Islam upon hearing of the da'wah of the Prophet SAW immediately. Now it's very interesting because what's suggested is that Bilal did not actually hear the call from the Prophet SAW himself initially, but he actually would have heard it from Umayyah complaining about the Prophet SAW. So his master, Umayyah ibn Khalaf is one of the custodians of the Ka'bah, the custodians of the idols. He was famous for perfuming the idols, for taking care of the Ka'bah. He's in the ranks of the likes of Abu Jahl and others at the time. And Bilal would have heard of Islam either directly from the Prophet SAW or through the complaints of Umayyah and others about the Prophet SAW. However, as we mentioned the narration last week, Bilal is considered amongst the first seven that publicly expressed their Islam. So Bilal, just like Khabbab hears the message of the Prophet SAW, hears the message of Tawheed and it immediately resonates with him.

It's probably one of the greatest injustices of the movie, Bilal, that came out a few years ago, that it made Tawheed secondary to the element of justice. However, Tawheed was the first right that Bilal found that resonated with him, ahadun ahad. Everything that stems from the affirmation of that one God is where you find Bilal, finding his dignity and his honour. And that's something that's consistent, even in the famous incident of Rib'i ibn Amir, that Allah has sent us to free people from being enslaved to other slaves, to being slaves to the Lord of all slaves. And then from the injustice of all other systems to the justice of Islam and from the constriction of this life to the expanse of the hereafter. And so something about Tawheed and what Tawheed represented, one God represented, immediately resonated with Bilal. Because it is necessarily the case that if you acknowledge the oneness of God, that puts all of humanity on a singular plane. When you are able to affirm the oneness of Allah SWT and associate no partners with him whatsoever. And that is the case with Bilal. That he hears this message and that is the sweetest part of it to him, because that's what he's going to keep on repeating over and over and over again. One God, one God, one God. And so Bilal embraces Islam. And as we said in the story of Khabbab and the story of Sumayya, Bilal does not have anyone to protect him. And his master, being the powerful man that he is, wants to make an example out of him so that others would not follow suit. And so what does Umayyah do?

Umayyah actually puts a collar on Bilal and puts hot iron on him. And he would render him unconscious, you find that he used to tie Bilal up by his wrists and his ankles. And he would put him out in the sun from sunrise to sunset. And they would deprive him of water. And not only would they deprive him of water, but out of cruelty, they would drip some drops of water on his chest to mentally torture him further. And Bilal would go days in this situation without sustenance. And Umayyah would tell Bilal, because remember, Bilal was one of the favoured slaves of Umayyah. Listen, just say, Allat wal Uzza, just say their names and this will end. This torture will end. Umayyah did not anticipate the resilience of Bilal in the face of this humiliation, in the face of this torture. So he's saying to him, just say Allat wal Uzza, just say the names of them and you will be free. He was not like Abu Jahl demanding Sumayya to curse the Prophet SAW. He's just demanding Bilal to say Allat wal Uzza. And Bilal would respond and say, ahadun ahad, one, one. And it would infuriate Umayyah because Umayyah felt like he was being generous to Bilal by giving him an easy way out. And so when that did not work, when the dehydration did not work and the torture did not work, the next level of cruelty was to take Bilal to the hoodlums of Ta'if.

And they would tie him up and Umayyah told them in Ta'if, he said, “Assault him in any way that you want.” I mean, think about how disgusting then the assaults on Bilal would have been. Go ahead and do with him whatever you want. Torture him, beat him, insult him, assault him in every way possible to break his spirit. And so he would leave Bilal for days in that way. Bilal still did not give up. And, you then had the next level of this, which was dragging Bilal through the streets. And as they dragged Bilal through the pathways of Mecca, they would leave streaks of his blood, lashing him, dehydrating him, torturing him. And Bilal still just says, ahadun ahad, one, one. There's a narration about Waraqa ibn Nawfal passing by him. And of course, as we mentioned in the story of Waraqa, that it does not add up from a timeline perspective that he said to Umayyah that, Wallahi, if you kill him, then I will build a shrine for him. And confirming ahadun ahad, Wallahi ya Bilal. But in any case, I mean, this torture went on for a long time. And Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud said that when they were put in the iron chains and tortured most severely, the only one who would never show his pain was Bilal. He completely sacrificed himself for the sake of Allah SWT. He completely, you know, removed his nafs. He gave it all for the sake of Allah SWT. And that’s upon whom was revealed, and there are those of people who sell themselves, seeking the pleasure of Allah SWT. And verily Allah SWT is kind to his servants. 

So with Abu Bakr, when we talked about him, the freeing of the khabbabs of the world and the Bilals of the world. There is no one who can compensate Abu Bakr for the money that he was spending for the sake of Allah SWT. All he was doing was seeking the pleasure of Allah SWT, and Allah SWT would please him. And Allah mentions on the other side of that, there are those who did not have money to give to free others. They only had themselves to give for freedom into slavery to Allah SWT. And those are the Bilals of the world who gave himself for Allah SWT, and that was all that he had. And so as the torture goes on for weeks and then months, Abu Bakr constantly pushes Umayyah to free Bilal or to sell him Bilal. And Umayyah wants to win this bout of torture. So to Umayyah success is seeing Bilal crumble under the pressure. And Bilal is not crumbling. And so as time goes on and Abu Bakr comes to him and he says, sell him to me. How much do you want? Name your price. And Umayyah keeps on putting it off. Finally, Umayyah tries to torture Bilal in the most severe way, which is that he has Bilal tied to the hot surface in the desert. And this is a Bilal who has now been dehydrated, who has now been starved, who has now been assaulted in every way. And all he says is, ahadun ahad, one, one. And Umayyah orders that a group of men bring a stone, a huge stone that takes multiple men. And as Bilal is stretched out in the desert to put the stone on top of his body. And, Bilal says ahadun ahad until he goes unconscious.

And the story of Bilal might've ended there. He may have become a shaheed, a martyr, just like Sumayya. But Abu Bakr keeps on pushing. And eventually as Umayyah realizes that this man is hopeless and that I'm not going to get him to relinquish his faith. I've tried every mechanism of torture and Umayyah is a man driven by money, right? So eventually he says to Abu Bakr, you know what, I'll sell them to you. How much? 10 uqiyahs. And uqiyah is a heavier currency at the time. They had dirhams and dinars and uqiyah is a large set, a large currency. And I forgot the exact measurement of what it would be equivalent to, but it's not a small amount. And he says to him that I'll sell them to you for 10 uqiyahs and some narrations say seven. And Abu Bakr does not bargain with the price. Abu Bakr says, “Okay, right away.” Now, as Abu Bakr purchases his freedom, Umayyah says to him, if you would have just given me one dinar, right? To show to Abu Bakr that Bilal is cheap, right? To belittle Bilal, even after all that he has put him through. And Bilal hears obviously that last word of humiliation from the man that has tortured him for all of these years. He said, “If you would have given me one dinar, I would have given him to you.” Abu Bakr responds and he says, “Wallahi, if you would have given him to me only for a hundred, I would have bought him. I would have purchased his freedom.” That Bilal is worth more to us. He's worth more to us than any price that he would have named. 

And that is a sign of the type of community that Bilal is joining. One that values him on the basis of his love for Allah, ahadun ahad, one God, one God. One that values him solely on that basis and that extols his virtue because of that and nothing else. And so Bilal joins the community of the Prophet SAW and Abu Bakr as-Siddiq and those great people. Now, at that point, as the Prophet SAW tries to negotiate through his uncle Abu Talib, a means by which he can give da'wah to the leaders of Quraysh. You know, Walid ibn Mughira and some of the leaders of the Quraysh, they say to the Prophet SAW, “Look, if you get rid of the Bilals of the world and the Khabbabs of the world and the Suhaibs of the world, we'll sit with you.” And Allah SWT responds with, do not push away those that call upon their Lord night and day, seeking Allah SWT's pleasure, that's not for you to do, that the pleasure of Allah SWT is what's going to attain the victory of Allah SWT. And that's why the Prophet SAW went, and he sat with them when the ayah was revealed. 

And at this point now, as you're watching Bilal proceed in the community of the Prophet SAW, a man who now walks free and amongst the companions of the Prophet SAW, and not just that, but he is our master who was freed by our master. And he's spoken to in this way as time goes on, even by the likes of Umar ibn al-Khattab. Think about where Umar was and where Bilal was. And Umar later on, as he's sitting with Khabbab and he's sitting with Bilal and we talked about what Umar asks Khabbab, what does he ask Bilal? He says to Bilal, why is it that when you were being tortured, and he refers to him as our master who was freed by our master. He says, “How come when you were being tortured, all you said was Ahadun Ahad, one, one?” You know, Bilal’s response was, “If I knew anything about Allah other than one, one, then I would have said it.” How simple the word, La ilaha illallah encapsulated in Ahadun Ahad, and Bilal does not know any other names of Allah, he doesn't call upon Allah with any du'a book, he doesn't have the names of Allah memorized. All he knows is one, one, Ahadun Ahad. As time goes on, you know, and there's so much to talk about in regard to the virtues of Bilal and I will try my best to get through at least enough of them. Of course, I've done other lectures on Bilal where you can find some of these things elaborated on further, but suffice it to say that Bilal would witness every battle and every journey of the Prophet SAW with the Prophet SAW. He was always by his side.

When the Prophet SAW wanted to be left alone, he only allowed Bilal to be with him. When the Prophet SAW was to prepare himself for any journey, he would inform Bilal first. Bilal was the gatekeeper in the literal and the metaphorical sense with the Prophet SAW in the figurative sense, he was the gatekeeper to the Prophet SAW, and he was the closest to the Prophet SAW in these journeys throughout. And that is also important to the context of the adhan of Bilal being the first mu'adhin. Abdullah ibn Zaid had a dream that in Medina as they were trying to figure out how they were going to institute the call to prayer. And in this dream, he said, “A spirit visited me and I saw a man wearing two green garments with a clapper, and I asked him to sell it to me. And he said, why? I told him for prayer. And he said to me, let me share with you a better way. And then he started to recite the adhan.” So Abdullah ibn Zaid came to the Prophet SAW to tell the Prophet SAW about the dream that he had. As he was arriving to tell the Prophet SAW about that dream, Umar ibn al-Khattab was coming to the Prophet SAW to inform him about the very same dream. The dream of the adhan, the words being chanted out as we hear them for every single salah. And who does the Prophet SAW appoint to be the one to say it? It's Bilal. Why does the Prophet SAW appoint Bilal? Is it because Bilal is a symbol for something? Is the Prophet SAW doing that to say that, look, you know, I'm going to uplift Bilal to do this for some reason?

No, Bilal deserves to be the one to chant the adhan, to say la ilaha illallah, standing atop the masjid, because Bilal was the one who was saying la ilaha illallah under that rock and under the most brutal forms of torture. It was the iman, the faith, and the certainty of Bilal that gained him the honor to say la ilaha illallah. So it was not because of his race, it was in spite of his race. It wasn't because of his previous status, it was despite it. It was because he deserved it and there was going to be no impediment to Bilal being chosen to that position. And Bilal had a strong voice, a beautiful, strong voice. And I want you to think about the closeness to the Prophet SAW. Bilal, before every adhan, would seek permission from the Prophet SAW to call the adhan. So it wasn't just going out and calling the adhan. That in and of itself is five times of access to the Prophet SAW. You go to the Prophet SAW and you say, “The prayer, O messenger of Allah?” And what was the answer of the Prophet SAW the famous answer? “Comfort us with the prayer, O Bilal.” And Bilal would stand up and he would call out, Allahu Akbar, Allahu Akbar, Allahu Akbar, Allahu Akbar. Ashhadu an la ilaha illallah, ashhadu an la ilaha illallah, until the end of the adhan. And as he would call it out and saying, ash hadu anna Muhammadun Rasulullah and Muhammad SAW, Rasulullah would walk out. Right, I mean, how beautiful to call the adhan. And as you're saying, I testify that Muhammad is the messenger of Allah and Muhammad, the messenger of Allah SAW walks out to lead the prayer as you call your adhan.

And there's a beautiful narration from Abu Hurairah. He said that we were with the messenger of Allah SAW. And Bilal stood up to give the adhan. And by the way, Bilal would have the honour to give the adhan in Madinah and on a journey with the Prophet SAW. So we're with the Prophet SAW and Bilal stood up to give the adhan. And when he fell silent, when Bilal finished his adhan, the Prophet SAW said, “Whoever says this with certainty, will enter paradise.” And there is an indication in there that as Bilal was saying, Allahu Akbar, Allahu Akbar. What did that mean to him? Right, how much certainty did Bilal have in Allahu Akbar? How much certainty did he have in ashhadu an la ilaha illallah, ashhadu anna Muhammad Rasulullah. Didn't he prove it? How much certainty in this being al-falah, not just as-salah, that this is success. Bilal was willing to die for these words and almost did die for these words when very few would consider the message of the Prophet SAW. So Bilal was the side of the Prophet SAW. He was the confidant of the Prophet SAW. If you wanted to visit the Prophet SAW, you had to go through Bilal. He was the one who would wake up the Prophet SAW for fajr. He used to set up the camps for the Prophet SAW. He used to guard the Prophet SAW when he wanted alone time. How much then did he spend with the Prophet SAW? His life literally revolved around the Messenger of Allah.  His life revolves around the Prophet SAW. And so you can imagine then what the death of the Prophet SAW will do to him, right?

And so that gives some context and I'm jumping a bit because we haven't got to that point of what the death of the Prophet SAW will do to Bilal. He's not just the mu'adhin of the Prophet SAW. He's also a mujahid on the side of the Prophet SAW. And he's also the first treasurer of the Prophet SAW, the one who would maintain the charity and the wealth as it came into the messenger of Allah SAW. So Bilal is the first in many different ways, right? There are many ways to attribute the first to Bilal. And all of it comes from obviously the place of certainty and steadfastness that Bilal had when he accepted Islam. Now with all these people, especially those that were enslaved and tortured, we talk about Badr, right? Badr is certainly a defining moment for Bilal as well. And his master Umayyah or his previous master, of course, who tortured him and oppressed him, Umayyah ibn Khalaf. If you go into the story of Umayyah ibn Khalaf, he actually did not want to go out to Badr, but he was shamed into going out to Badr by Abu Jahl. Umayyah was not someone who liked, believe it or not, who liked conflict. He was scared of it. He liked instead to finance his way out of everything, to get other people to do things for him. He thrived off of his lineage and off of his access to power, but Umayyah was not one who actually liked to be in battle or to be in confrontation. And so Umayyah actually tried to find many loopholes to get out of this, to get out of the battle of Badr, but had to go out as Abu Jahl had shamed him. And the Prophet SAW could see it in his eyes as he came out to the day of Badr that Umayyah did not actually want to be there.

But there's something that precedes that, which is that Umayyah was close to two men from the companions of the Prophet SAW. He was close to Saad ibn Mu'adh, in Medina. And he was close to Abdurrahman ibn Auf. And Abdurrahman was, you know, Abdurrahman ibn Auf, of course, one of the early converts of Islam, maintained a relationship with Umayyah even after Islam, and they had a deal with one another. The deal was that Abdurrahman ibn Auf was entrusted with the property and the wealth and the family of Umayyah ibn Khalaf in Medina, and Umayyah was entrusted with the wealth and the property and the family of Abdurrahman in Mecca. So even after Islam, they had this document written up where they made this promise to one another. And Umayyah did not accept the name of Abdurrahman. His name before Islam was Abdu Amru. So Abdurrahman no longer goes by Abdu Amru, but Umayyah refuses to call him Abdurrahman, and so they settled on AbduIlah, okay? Because they disagree on who God is. So he's the slave of the God, right? So to Umayyah, who would call him AbduIlah, and Abdurrahman, who of course referred to Ar-Rahman, this was the way that they negotiated that contract. So Umayyah ibn Khalaf shows up at the Battle of Badr, and we've talked about what happened to Abu Jahl, and we talked about the vengeance, or what happened with Ammar and Khabbab on the Day of Badr, and so many different people seeing their oppressors fall on the Day of Badr. When Umayyah showed up to the Battle of Badr, he immediately tried to figure out how to get himself out of a direct confrontation.

And so he saw Abdurrahman ibn Auf on the Day of Badr, and he submitted himself to Abdurrahman right away. And he told Abdurrahman that he'll ransom himself with the most expensive of property to get himself out of being killed or being in that fight. Now, can you imagine the emotion of Bilal seeing the man who oppressed him and who treated him that way for all of those years on that Day of Badr? Can you imagine what was going through the heart and the mind of Bilal? And so when Bilal saw him, he wanted to kill him. And Abdurrahman ibn Auf, he narrates the incident. He said that, you know, I captured Umayyah, I took him in, and Bilal followed me with Umayyah, and he shouted out, and he said, I will not live if he lives. Meaning one of us is going to die. Either I die or he dies. That he must die, that I want my revenge. And Abdurrahman ibn Auf is literally shielding Umayyah from Bilal, who is so emotional. Now, the companions were waiting for the ayat to be revealed in regard to how they deal with the captive. So in regard to Umayyah ibn Khalaf, this is no longer in the battle. This is after the battle has already ceased. And Bilal wants to take his revenge on him for what he did to him for all those years. And as they are waiting, listen to how Abdurrahman ibn Auf describes the situation. He says, I literally had to protect Umayyah while Bilal and some of the Ansar were poking with their swords around me, trying to get past me to hit him. And Abdurrahman ibn Auf says, my foot was actually injured because of one of the swords going through, trying to get at Umayyah and going past and hitting my foot. And Bilal killed Umayyah ibn Khalaf that day and took his revenge that day for what was done to him. 

This is powerful because it shows you justice. It also shows you the very raw emotion of Bilal and seeing the man who did this to him for all those months in the most humiliating fashion. And Bilal taking, having the opportunity to do this. To take his revenge and to have justice in this life with Umayyah ibn Khalaf before the next. And Abdurrahman, he used to say, may Allah have mercy on Bilal, he wounded me, and I got nothing out of the ransom. So not only did Bilal cause my foot to be wounded, but I did not get anything from my prisoner out of ransoming my prisoner. Now there's a plot twist, which is important here. And it's a gem of sorts, which is that Bilal would actually marry the sister of Abdurrahman ibn Auf, Hala. So Abdurrahman would become the brother-in-law of Bilal later on. And so that's a story that becomes within the family at that point of Bilal and Umayyah ibn Khalaf. As for the brother of Umayyah ibn Khalaf, Ubayy ibn Khalaf, Ubayy was the first person, the only person killed from the hand of the Prophet SAW in the battle of Uhud. Finally, we come to Fath Makkah. And truly it can be said that Badr was the day of Hamza, Uhud was the day of Talha, Khandaq was the day of Salman, Fath Makkah was the day of Bilal. It was the day of Bilal.

Bilal has the privilege of entering the Ka’bah with the Prophet SAW, disposing of the very idols in whose name he was subjugated. And on that day, the Prophet SAW tells Bilal to stand up on top of the Ka’bah and to call out the Adhan. In the same place that Bilal was placed under a stone and almost killed, saying, Ahadun Ahad, now Bilal is rising up above the Ka’bah to call out Allahu Akbar, Allahu Akbar. And that is as some of the scholars say, even harder on the hearts of the mushrikeen than the idols being thrown out themselves, is Bilal rising up onto the Ka’bah because that represents not just the disposal of those idols, but everything that those idols gave them access to do, the power that it gave them has now been taken away. And Bilal stands up on the Ka’bah, the only man to do so, think of the scene, the first and only man to do so, calling out Allahu Akbar, Allahu Akbar. Ash hadu an la ilaha illallah, ash hadu anna Muhammadan Rasulullah. And as he climbed up, many comments were said. Some said, a black slave, climbing up the Ka’bah. Many of those who entered Islam knew, they made comments, even though they'd embraced Islam, they made comments. They, you know, Harith ibn Hisham, he said, couldn't Muhammad SAW find other than this crow. So it's a racist comment to call the people to prayer. Suhail ibn Amr, he said, if Allah detests the thing, then he will change it. Abu Sufyan said, I will not say anything for if I do, it may be that the heavens and the earth will testify against me.

So many different narrations of people making comments, Muslims and some of those who were not Muslim, making comments about Bilal climbing. And according to Ibn Jawzi and others, this is where the verse in Surah Al-Hujurat, that, “Oh people, we have made you into male and female, nations and tribes, that you may get to know one another and verily, the most noble of you in the sight of Allah SWT is the one with the most piety.” And so, Bilal has the privilege of climbing on top of the Ka’bah and saying, Allahu Akbar, Allahu Akbar. He attains that honour. And there's another incidence on that day of Fath Makkah that shows you the place of Bilal. Bilal, Ammar, and Suhaib, they walk by Abu Sufyan, who of course had become Muslim in Fath Makkah. And they walk by him and of course, they were insulted by Abu Sufyan, they were hurt by Abu Sufyan for so many years. He represented the opposing party even as he became Muslim because it was stamped in their conscience and their memory of what Abu Sufyan represented. And most of the companions of Abu Sufyan had perished by that point, right? In the battles, the various battles between the Muslims and them. And it was the mercy of Allah SWT that Allah preserved those early slaves in Mecca to be there on Fath Makkah, on the day of the conquest of Mecca, and not die in the battles that would take place between the original call of Islam and that eventual conquest of Mecca, which represented the great victory of Islam. And so, Bilal, Ammar, and Suhaib, they come across Abu Sufyan, and they said, wallahi“Wallahi, the swords of Allah did not reach the enemies of Allah like they should have..”

Like you barely escaped, you're lucky we missed you. You're lucky that the swords of Allah did not reach your throat as they should have. So Abu Sufyan, who of course, was next in line after Abu Jahl in the leadership of Mecca until it was conquered. Abu Sufyan, as he says that, he was angry and he complained to Abu Bakr As-Siddiq. Now, the Prophet SAW, of course, wanted to bring the hearts together. And so that's why the Prophet SAW acknowledged Abu Sufyan and said, “Whoever enters into the home of Abu Sufyan, then he is safe.” But here, Abu Sufyan has transgressed and now repented. And the Prophet SAW is wanting to solidify the ranks of Islam at this point. So Abu Sufyan complained to Abu Bakr. And Abu Bakr went to Bilal and Suhaib and Ammar. And he said, “Did you say this to the leader of Quraysh?” So, he rebuked them for what they said. And then Abu Bakr went to the Prophet SAW and he informed the Prophet SAW about what had happened. And Abu Bakr did not rebuke Bilal and Ammar and Suhaib because of jahiliyya, he rebuked them because he had the vision of the Prophet SAW and wanting to solidify the ranks of Islam. And here's what ends up happening. As Abu Bakr shares this with the Prophet SAW, the Prophet SAW says, “O Abu Bakr, it might be that you angered them.” Who is them? Bilal and Suhaib and Ammar. “And verily, if you would have angered them,

then you would have angered your Lord as a result.” Abu Bakr, of course being a Siddiq, what does he do? He goes to Bilal, and he goes to Ammar, and he goes to Suhaib, and he immediately seeks forgiveness from them. And they immediately say, may Allah forgive you. There is nothing, of course they would hold nothing against Abu Bakr Al-Siddiq. And that is what caused him to be relieved. So the Prophet SAW showing that honour to Bilal, he didn't sell them out once he got what he wanted, right? That's not the Prophet SAW. There's something that the Prophet SAW does is he's treating the Ansar and solidifying their position. And here, solidifying the companions's position as well. Those early companions of the Prophet SAW, the Bilals of the world and the Suhaibs of the world and the Ammars of the world, and so on and so forth. And so how would it be then when the Prophet SAW passes away and Bilal's life revolves around the Prophet SAW.

The messenger of Allah SAW as he was passing away and Bilal saw him in pain, saw the fever of the Prophet SAW, causing him to go unconscious and come back and all of those things. Bilal said, “Oh what grief I am in. If only I would have died before this.” Pay attention to this part. How sad I am, what a day of grief if only I would have died before this. Bilal does not know what he's going to do after the Prophet SAW passes away. His life revolves around him. And of course, Allah SWT decreed that the Prophet SAW would die. If he dies or if he is killed, will you go back to on your heels? And of course, Bilal would be firm on the message of the Messenger SAW. But imagine how difficult it is for Bilal to try to call the Adhan now. When every Adhan in Medina, he used to go to the Prophet SAW and say, is it a time for prayer, oh Messenger of Allah? And the Prophet SAW would say yes. And then he'd call out, ash-hadu anna Muhammad Rasulullah and Muhammad Rasulullah SAW would walk out. Now he has to call the Adhan, and the Messenger of Allah SAW is not there. And that is a difficult thing for the heart of Bilal and of course all of the companions. 

And so Bilal stands up after the death of the Prophet SAW and he starts to call the Adhan. And as he gets to the name of Muhammad SAW, he breaks down crying. And he tries over and over and over again to say ash-hadu anna Muhammad Rasulullah and the Adhan and he can't do it. And all of the companions in Medina are crying, hearing Bilal struggling to try to say ash-hadu anna Muhammad Rasulullah. So Bilal calls, comes down, and Bilal says, I will never call Adhan for anyone again after the Prophet SAW. I can't do it anymore. In fact, he tells Abu Bakr, send me out in battle. I can't be in Medina anymore because everywhere he looks, he sees the Prophet SAW. Everything in Medina was the Prophet SAW to him. He followed the Prophet SAW everywhere. He guarded the Prophet SAW everywhere. He remembered his smile everywhere he looked. He remembered his warmth, his presence. 

So he says to Abu Bakr, and look at what he says to him. He says, “If you freed me for Allah, then let me go anywhere that I want. And if you have freed me for yourself, then hold me and do with me what you want.” Abu Bakr said, “Of course I freed you for Allah, O Bilal.” He says to him, “Go ahead.” And Bilal goes out to Ash-Sham in the process of Jihad, just like many of the companions went out in battle against the Romans at that moment. And the next time that Bilal would be gathered with the companions was in Ash-Sham, particularly in the conquest of Jerusalem. And Umar, as Jerusalem is opened, he sees Bilal and he begs Bilal, who said that he didn't want to call Adhan for anyone after the Messenger of Allah SAW. He says to Bilal, “Go up and call the Adhan, O Bilal, the way that you used to when we were in Medina.” And after prompting Bilal so much, Bilal will stand up in Al-Quds, in Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa. The first man to call the Adhan in Medina and then in Mecca, will now be the first man to call the Adhan in Al-Quds, making him the first mu'adhin in all three of the holiest places in Islam. And as Bilal goes up and calls out, Ashhadu an la ilaha illa Allah, ashhadu anna Muhammad Rasulullah, all of the companions start to cry when Bilal calls the Adhan. It was as if they forgot that they were in Jerusalem in this new chapter of Islam, because they went back reminiscing on the presence of the Prophet SAW and hearing the voice of Bilal calling the Adhan in Al-Medina. And the only other Adhan that we know of is an Adhan that Bilal gave in Medina one more time at the request of Al-Hasan and Al-Hussein, the beloved two grandsons of the Prophet SAW. 

When did Bilal pass away? I didn't mention his name when I did the lecture on the coronavirus and the plague that killed the companions. But Amwas, many of the books actually mentioned that this is when Bilal passed away in Ash-Sham due to the plague of Amwas in the year 639, where 25,000 people died, including the likes of Mu'adh ibn Jabal and so many of the great companions of the Prophet SAW. Here is Bilal now, on his deathbed and his wife, as she sees Bilal leaving this world, and Bilal once saw the Prophet SAW leaving this world and said, what a day of grief. His wife sees Bilal passing away and she says, what a day of grief, what a tragedy. And Bilal says instead, “What a great joy it is. Tomorrow I will meet my loved ones, Muhammad SAW and his companions.” So Bilal was longing for the presence of the Messenger of Allah SAW and the companions. And he passed away joining the Prophet SAW and the companions in that high level. 

And I'll just end with these few narrations of the virtues of Bilal and there's so many. The Prophet SAW said, I was shown Al-Jannah and I saw Umm Sulaym, and I heard the noise of some steps in front of me. It was the steps of Bilal in Al-Jannah. So the Prophet SAW said to Bilal, “Tell me what is the most hopeful act that you have done with Allah SWT since your acceptance of Islam? Because oh Bilal, I heard your footsteps ahead of me in Al-Jannah.” And Bilal said, “I do not consider any act more hopeful except that when I make wudu in any time of the night or the day, I immediately perform two rak'ahs of salah and or pray as long as was destined for me to pray.” The Prophet SAW also said, what an excellent person Bilal is and he's the leader of the mu'adhins on the day of judgment. And the Prophet SAW said, the mu'adhins will have the longest necks on the day of judgment. And there is another narration from Abdullah Ibn Umar, may Allah be pleased with him and his father who said, “Glad tidings of Bilal.” And he said, “For what ya Aba Abdillah?” He said, “I heard the messenger of Allah SAW say that Bilal will come on the day of judgment holding a standard and all the mu'adhins will follow Bilal until they enter Jannah.” That's a narration that Suyuti considers authentic. 

Finally, one more narration, which shows you the place of Bilal in the hearts of the companions. Abdullah Ibn Umar, whose father taught him that Bilal is our master who was freed by our master. Abdullah Ibn Umar named his son Bilal, after the Bilal. And of course, Bilal is frequently named in our ummah. And as a poet was praising Bilal Ibn Abdullah Ibn Umar, and he said that the Bilal of Abdullah is the best of Bilal's, Abdullah Ibn Umar interjected and he said, you have lied. He said, the Bilal of Rasulullah SAW is the best of all Bilal's. The Bilal of Rasulullah SAW is the best of all Bilal's. And we have his name, we have his legacy, we have his memory. I could go on and on about him. And the only reason we don't have more hadith from him is because of the age at which he died, and the distance that he kept away from the city of Medina after the death of the Prophet SAW. May Allah allow us to hear his voice and his footsteps on the day of judgment, and to follow him into the presence of the Prophet SAW, the one he loved so much and the one we love so much. May Allah grant us the companionship of the beloved SAW. May Allah grant us the certainty of Bilal, when we say those words that he said. May Allah SWT forgive us for our shortcomings. Allahumma ameen. 

