As-salamu alaikum wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh. Everyone, welcome back to the first and inshallah ta'ala tonight we will continue with Ja'far ibn Abi Talib RA and his story of Islam. Now I want to just start off by saying that sometimes you have some of these firsts, some of these nobles that are overlooked because of who they're related to. And so when you think about the children of Abi Talib and Fatima bint Asad, you obviously think of none other than Ali ibn Abi Talib RA. But Ja'far RA is truly a special person and special in his own right. Not just because of who he's related to but because of who he himself would become RA. And if you've watched the movie The Message, that's when a lot of people saw the role of Ja'far in Abyssinia and that's really probably the only incident that most people can recall when they're thinking about Ja'far RA, is the role that he played in Abyssinia. But his life is just full of benefits and full of quality for us to take lessons from and for us to really appreciate the role that he played in setting the stage for Islam. 

And so when you talk about the firsts, Ja'far RA is not only one of the first converts, he’s part of the first hijrah to Abyssinia even though he's from the second batch to Abyssinia which is modern day Ethiopia. He's from the first to migrate for the sake of Allah. He's the first to do da'wah to a king. He's the first to have a king convert to Islam at his hand. He is among the first Muslims who would be martyred in battle as a commander, which we'll see in the battle of Mu'tah. He's the first to recite Quran in the court of a king. You have so many different ways to look at it, but he is someone who holds much to his own right.

And I want us to really appreciate him as we go through his life. Amongst his names, he's known as Abu Abdillah because of his son Abdullah and Dhul Janahain, the one with two wings which obviously has a beautiful story to it that we will talk about. Now a lot of the family history of Banu Hashim we covered when we talked about Ali and Fatima, may Allah be pleased with them, but I want to talk about just a little bit once again about the way that Ja'far RA comes into the picture and reminds everyone who his mother is. We know his father Abu Talib and his mother is Fatima bint Asad RA, who if you remember was the first Hashimi woman to accept Islam. The first woman from the tribe of Banu Hashim to accept Islam and some say the 10th or the 11th person to accept Islam. Now, if you remember with Fatima bint Asad, when she accepted Islam, she accepted Islam instantly. And she was amongst those who considered to make hijrah to Abyssinia with her son, Ja'far, and with her daughter-in-law. But she had a specific love for Ja'far RA, because Ja'far looked like the Prophet SAW. And so her love of Ja'far was connected to his resemblance of the Prophet SAW, which we will talk about. So amongst the children of Abu Talib and the cousins of the Prophet SAW, no one looked more like the Prophet SAW than Ja'far RA. 

And if you remember the names, the way that these names are chosen, and the children of Abu Talib all had something to live up to. And you look at Abu Talib and how he named his four sons. We said Talib is the oldest, and each one of them has 10 years between them. So Talib is the oldest son, same age as the Prophet SAW. And Talib means someone with high aspirations. Aqeel, who's 10 years younger than Talib, is someone with high intellect. Ja'far is 10 years after Aqeel. And Ja'far means someone with high eloquence, with flowing speech and compassion. And this refers to a flowing river or a cow with extra milk. And we know that milk is knowledge. So he's elevated in his intellect, or elevated in his eloquence in this regard. And Ali RA refers to one who is high in nobility. And we can see, the way that these names would play out. So Ja'far is the brother that comes right before Ali RA. And if you remember the story of how Ali ended up in the house of the Prophet SAW, it gives us some insight into how Ja'far RA was raised as well. Al-Abbas came to the Prophet SAW and they spoke about the poverty of Abu Talib. So Al-Abbas, who is the brother of Abu Talib, the uncle of the Prophet SAW, comes to the Prophet SAW and he says that Abu Talib is going through some difficult times, that he is suffering from poverty. And he suggests to the Prophet SAW, how about we make things easy on him by helping him with his children? So you take one of his children and I will take one of his children and we'll raise them to lighten the burden on Abu Talib. So they go to Abu Talib together and Abu Talib says, as they present that, we can take two of your children to raise them to lessen the burden that is upon you. Abu Talib says, you can take all of them or you can take whoever you want from amongst them, but just make sure you leave me, Aqeel. So Abu Talib loved Aqeel in particular in a special way. 

Now, the Prophet SAW at this point of course, is living in a much better financial situation, being married to Khadijah RA. And if you haven't deciphered it yet, Al-Abbas RA was also someone who was in a better financial state, who was skilled in his trade and often is referenced in regard to his successful business endeavours, when we're talking about some of these other people. So the Prophet SAW takes Ali and Al-Abbas takes Ja'far. So you can imagine them leaving the house of Abu Talib, Ja'far is going to go live with Al-Abbas RA and be raised in his house. Ali RA would go with the Prophet SAW and be raised in his house. And as we said, it is the divine planning of Allah SWT that Ali was not officially adopted, which of course, tabanni was a practice in jahliyyah, which was to fully take on the name of the person that adopts you. He never became Ali ibn Muhammad, he was never breastfed by Khadijah, even though Khadijah RA had flowing milk. And this was Allah SWT's divine planning that would allow him to marry Fatima RA. 

As for Ja'far, he was raised by Al-Abbas in the same way that Ali RA was raised by the Prophet SAW, like a son, but at the same time, the difference between Ali's relationship with the Prophet SAW and the relationship of Ja'far with the Prophet SAW was beyond just the fact that Ali was raised in his house. Because of the age of Ja'far, Ja'far had a different type of relationship with the Prophet SAW. So he was older than Ali, he was 10 years older than Ali, and he had a different relationship with the Prophet SAW that was more like a younger brother. And this is something that we'll see the deep love that the Prophet SAW has for Ja'far, which also gives us this idea of silaturrahim, to enjoy good family relations beyond just the siblings, beyond just your own children and your aunts and your uncles. But here, you see the importance of having these strong relationships with our cousins, with our family members in the extended sense. 

So anyway, when does Ja'far embrace Islam? Some of the reports say that he was as early as the 15th or 16th person to accept Islam. So even though we don't have any specific records of the exact time of the conversion of Ja'far RA, we know that it was very early on, and we know that there was no hesitation. Of course, Banu Hashim, you found the likes of Abu Lahab, and you found the likes of Ali RA. And if Ali RA embraced Islam that early, and then Fatima bint Asad embraced Islam that early, Ja'far is amongst those who embraced Islam very early on with his cousin, the Prophet SAW. And the dates suggest that it was probably just like we saw with Sa'eed bin Zayd and Fatima bint al-Khattab, Ja'far and his wife Asma’ bint Umais accepting Islam together. Now, who is Asma’ bint Umais? If you remember the story of Lubaba, when we talked about the believing sisters, as we talked about Lubaba bint al-Harith RA. So Asma’ bint Umais is one of the believing sisters, the early Muslim women that would dedicate themselves to this cause, that would give themselves to the cause of Allah SWT and the messenger of Allah SAW. The way that we see in Lubaba RA's case and Maymunah bint al-Harith and Salma bint Umais, that same type of devotion in coming close to Allah and the messenger SAW. So you have Ja'far and Asma’ accepting Islam together. 

Now, we don't have much about their life before the migration to Abyssinia, but we do know that they were amongst the family of the Prophet SAW and they were in that situation, subjected to similar persecution. And that the persecution became so severe for Ja'far and Asma’, that they sought permission to be amongst those who would go out to Abyssinia. And so we know that they were severely persecuted and we know that the next chapter in history would indicate the favour of Allah and the messenger SAW upon Ja'far RA by choosing him to not just be amongst those that would go to Abyssinia, but to be the leader of this batch that would include some of the most noble of the companions of the Prophet SAW, the likes of Uthman, the likes of Ruqayya, the daughter of the Prophet SAW, the likes of Zubayr ibn al-Awwam, and Asma’ ibn Abi Bakr, and Ubadah ibn Samit, and Abu Salam, and Umm Salama. And the list goes on of some of the most noble companions that were in that batch of Abyssinia that would make hijrah to Abyssinia. And the Prophet SAW would choose Ja'far RA, who was amongst the youngest of them to be their spokesperson, to be their leader. And this is also something about the youth and the way that the Prophet SAW was able to activate and empower the younger people amongst the companions of the Prophet SAW. 

Ja'far RA was in his early 20s when the Prophet SAW sent him to Abyssinia, but the Prophet SAW still appointed him to be that first ambassador and that first spokesperson for Islam. And look how Ja'far would rise to the occasion. The Prophet SAW, he told the companions without knowing al-Najashi, without knowing the ruler of Abyssinia, As-Hama al-Najashi, personally, but he knew of his qualities and certainly through divine guidance,. The Prophet SAW says, “If you go to Abyssinia, it is best for you, for their ruler will not tolerate injustice and it is a friendly country. So stay there until Allah SWT relieves you from your distress.” So the Prophet SAW is testifying to the justice of a Christian ruler in Abyssinia. And the messenger of Allah SAW will send with Ja'far RA as well, an invitation to Islam, to the ruler of Abyssinia, knowing that Najashi is a righteous man, and he is someone who the truth will resonate with. Now this is a risky move, obviously, because if these people go to Abyssinia and Najashi finds them to be amongst those that are like, they have been characterized by the people of Mecca and Najashi punishes them and persecutes them, the Prophet SAW would have lost the finest batch of his companions, right? I mean, these are the best of his companions. This wasn't like a test run where you could send some companions and hold back others. These people include the closest family members of the Prophet SAW and some of the best of people. So this is a risky move, if Najashi does not live up to what's expected of him, right?

So there are different ways that this could go. Najashi could reject Islam, and he could reject taking them in. And there could be many reasons for him rejecting them taking him in. One of them is that Najashi has a relationship with some of the leaders of Quraysh and that you don't want to put in a bad place or you don't want to jeopardize your trade routes. You don't want to jeopardize your diplomatic relations with the people of Mecca. And so he could have said that,  I'm going to send all of these people back or I'll even kill them or I'll do something with them because I don't want to ruin what I have right now with the people in Mecca. He could have done that. Or he could have accepted them but rejected their religion, all right? So he could have stayed Christian but rejected their religion. And at the same time, he could have said, but you still have refuge here, all right? Which for the purpose of the hijrah would have been sufficient, okay? That at the bare minimum, he gives them refuge from what's happening in Mecca. And that way, as things become more severe in Mecca, people have an alternative and you will find that even Abu Bakr Al-Siddiq RA was on his way to Abyssinia, right? So we're talking about the future batches that would then go to Abyssinia to escape the persecution of Mecca. Even Abu Bakr RA was going to make his way to Abyssinia, and then he was stopped because of someone recognizing his noble qualities and offering him protection. And that's another story that I don't want to take too much time with, but he could have just said, I'm going to give you refuge, but I'm not going to accept your religion. Or the third one is that he accepts Islam, and he accepts them and gives them refuge in the land of Abyssinia. 

So, the Prophet SAW is putting a lot into this migration by the types of people that he is sending, and Quraysh know that the stakes are high as well. They know that, and that's why they would first try to stop them from migrating to Abyssinia. They would try to capture them on the way, but they were not able to. But they also know that if they are able to get Najashi to send them back, that will be a crippling blow to the Prophet SAW and to the early Muslims as they are dealing with that persecution. So anyway, the Prophet SAW sends them, and they settle that land. Initially, Najashi grants them refuge. He does not accept their religion right away. And Quraysh sends to him these two men, and they're not just any two men. They're two men that are skilful in convincing, in potentially convincing Najashi to do what Quraysh wants him to do. He sends to them Abdullah ibn Abi Rabi'a and more famously, Amr ibn Aas. And they have all of these gifts, and they have all of these clothes. They have all these skins of leather. And Amr ibn Aas has a relationship with Najashi through his father, Al-Aas, that precedes Islam. So he's able to tap into not just his ability to convince him of things, not just his eloquence, but also his relationship with the Najashi. And he is going to try to use first and foremost bribery, along with, of course, invoking the relationship that he has with the Najashi. And even brings a gift to each of the generals of Najashi. So he brings all of these gifts from Quraysh and they give these gifts to Najashi and to all of the generals. And then at that point, after he gives the gifts, after they reminisce on some of the memories and talk about the relationship that they had, Amr ibn Aas says that there are some people, fools from our land that have taken refuge here. And he said that these are people that are the worst of us. They reject our religion, and they reject your religion. So he also knows that Najashi is a religious man. And so if he can convince him that Islam is not just opposed to our idolatry, it's also opposed to your religion, your way, and is insulting to your way, then maybe he can tap into his religious sensitivity. 

So they have a lot going for them. They have the diplomatic relations, they have the religious angle, they have the relationship angle, they have the gifts and the bribery and the wealth. They have a lot that's going for them as they approach Najashi to speak to him about them. So Najashi summons the Muslims to the court and Ja'far RA is chosen to speak at that moment. So Ja'far comes forward and at that point, Ja'far RA gives probably one of the most eloquent speeches ever about Islam. In fact, if you just read the speech of Ja'far RA, you can see the beautiful ways that he was able to explain Islam concisely, yet encompass so many different things. So Najashi asks him to tell him about this religion. So Ja'far RA says, and obviously it's much more beautiful in Arabic, but he says to him, “O king, we were a people in a state of ignorance and immorality, immorality and straying and observations. Morality, worshiping idols and eating the flesh of dead animals, committing all sorts of abomination and shameful deeds, breaking the ties of kinship, treating our guests badly, and the strong amongst us exploited the weak. We remained in this state until Allah sent us a prophet, one of our own, whose lineage, truthfulness, trustworthiness and integrity were well known to us. He called us to worship Allah alone and to renounce the stones and the idols, which we and our ancestors used to worship beside Allah. He commanded us to speak the truth, to honour our promises, to be kind to our relatives, to be helpful to our neighbours, to cease all forbidden acts, to abstain from bloodshed, to avoid obscenities and false witness, and to not appropriate an orphan's property nor slander chaste woman. He ordered us to worship Allah alone and not to associate anything with him, to uphold prayer, to give sadaqah, to give zakat, to give charity and to fast in the month of Ramadan. We believed in him and what he brought to us from Allah, and we follow him and what he has asked us to do and we keep away from what he has forbidden us from. Thereupon, O King, our people attacked us, they visited the severest punishment upon us to make us renounce our religion and take us back to the old immorality and the worship of idols. They oppressed us, they made life intolerable for us and they obstructed us from observing our religion. So we left for your land, choosing you before anyone else, desiring your protection and hoping to live in justice and in peace in your midst.”

So Najashi hears these beautiful words and this is the way that Ja'far RA really lives up to his name and summarizes Islam in a pretty intimidating setting. You’re standing in the court of Najashi and what you say about Islam here is going to be highly consequential. And Najashi was so moved and so touched that he asked him, he said, “Do you have anything of this divine revelation that has come to your prophet?” And we find that Ja'far RA chooses Surah Maryam and particularly chooses to recite the story of the birth of Jesus, the son of Mary, peace be upon them, from Surah Maryam. And he makes mention in the book of Maryam AS, all the way through the virtues of Maryam, through the birth of Isa AS, through Jesus peace be upon him speaking from the cradle. And when he finished reciting, he looked up and he saw that Najashi was in tears and that some of the generals of Najashi were in tears as well. Najashi, he said, he took a stick and he said that, “I swear that Isa AS did not exceed what you have said by the length of the stick. This, and what Isa AS brought are from the same source.” And he says, “You may go. Wallahi, I will never give them up to you and they will never be betrayed.”

And Amr ibn As, of course, he tried. He spoke to Abdullah that night and said, “How can we get him to change his mind?” So they came and they said, “Let's say to Najashi that they say that Isa AS, that Jesus peace be upon him is nothing more than a creature.” And so Najashi summons them again and he explains that Isa AS is the word of God, is the servant of God, is the messenger of God, is al-Masih. And Najashi is once again satisfied, and he sends back Amr ibn As and he sends back Abdullah ibn Abi Rabi'a back to Mecca. And he threatens them that if you come and you try to take them, he says, “Wallahi, that no matter what you do, not for a mountain of gold would I allow them to be hurt, nor would I exchange them.” And then Najashi even gives back their bribes and sends them back to Mecca in that regard. At that point, Najashi dismisses everyone from the courts, and he tells Ja'far RA that he himself has now embraced Islam, that he has become Muslim. We'll talk about Najashi, I'm paraphrasing this part of the story because I want to talk about Najashi from his vantage point in some detail. 

So at this point now, the Muslims are settled in Abyssinia. Ja'far RA has successfully given da'wah to the king who has secretly embraced Islam. They have protection, they live as a minority there, and they're going to stay there for a long time. Some of them will stay longer than others. Ja'far and Asma’ will stay in Abyssinia for an entire decade to 12 years. And what you find is that with Ja'far and Asma’, that all three of their sons were born in Abyssinia. So they had Abdullah, they had Muhammad, and they had Aoun. May Allah SWT be pleased with them all. So they settle in Abyssinia and they have their children there and obviously a huge portion of the seerah is missed because they're settled in Abyssinia. They're not with the Prophet SAW in Mecca, nor are they with the initial migration to Medina. And so they will settle there and they will stay in Abyssinia while Badr takes place, while Uhud takes place, while Khandaq takes place. 

When does Ja'far RA make his way to Medina? It was at the same time as Khaybar. Okay, so we're talking about much later in time in Medina, several years after the hijrah. And it was right at the time that the Prophet SAW had won the battle of Khaybar. And when Ja'far RA came, the Prophet SAW kissed him between his eyes, and he was in so much joy. He embraced Ja'far and kissed him between his eyes. Imagine how much he loved Ja'far and how much he missed him and how much there was left to be discussed between the Prophet SAW and Ja'far, and the Prophet SAW kisses him right between his eyes. And he says, “I don't know which of the two things has given me greater joy. Is it the coming of Ja'far or is it the conquest of Khaybar?” That these are two wonderful pieces of news, and I don't know which of them is greater right now. But he was so happy to have Ja'far RA back in his midst, a person who was like a brother to him and a person who resembled the Prophet SAW in so many different ways. Now, there are certain stories and qualities that I want to talk about here now.

When Ja'far RA finally is part of the community in Medina, and we get to observe some of his qualities post-Islam since almost all of it was lived in Abyssinia. He settled there, he had his family there and now he's with the Prophet SAW. You might remember that when Hamza RA was martyred, that, these families, Banu Hashim, they wanted to take care of each other's children. And when Hamza RA's daughter was left behind after he was martyred, Ali, Ja'far and Zayd all wanted to raise the daughter of Hamza RA. And the way the Prophet SAW settled it between the three, he comes to them and Zayd says that she is the daughter of my brother, Zayd ibn Haritha. And what Zayd meant by that is that the Prophet SAW paired off Zayd and Hamza at the time of the hijrah. So he said she's the daughter of my brother, so I should be the one to take care of her. Ja'far RA said, look, she's the daughter of my uncle because Hamza is the uncle of Ja'far. And my wife is her maternal aunt as well, because Asma’ bint Umais is the sister of Salma bint Umais. So Salma is the wife of Hamza, Asma’ is the wife of Ja'far. So Ja'far says Hamza is my uncle and my wife and his wife are sisters. Therefore, because she's the maternal aunt of his daughter, that she's going to be the best person to take care of his daughter. Ali RA said, she's the daughter of my uncle. And he tried to make that claim. And the Prophet SAW, the way he judges between the three is he says to all three of them something beautiful.

So he says to Ali RA, “You are from me and I am from you.” To Zayd he says, “You are our brother and freed servants.” So, it's a way of showing Zayd RA his favour, that you're not just the beloved one of Hamza. And under my guardianship. And then he says to Ja'far RA, that he has the best right to raise the daughter of Hamza. Why? Because number one, you find the famous hadith where the Prophet SAW said, the maternal aunt is like the mother. And so, Asma’ is closest to her in that sense. But then he says to Ja'far RA. And this is not the only time he would say this to Ja'far. He says that, “You are the closest to me, both in your physical appearance as well as in your character.” What an amazing compliment to be given to you by the Prophet SAW. That there is no person who resembles me in external appearance, your internal appearance, meaning your character than you, O Ja'far. What an amazing compliment for the Prophet SAW to give to him. So we'll talk about some of those qualities in Ja'far RA. 

But before that, I want to talk about how Umar RA challenges Asma’ bint Umais. Now you have Ja'far and Asma’ bint Umais in the community of Medina. And this is new, right? I mean, they've been away from the community of the Prophet SAW for all of these years. And Umar RA comes to visit Hafsa, and he sees in the house of Hafsa RA, Asma’, and he asks about her, he says, who is that? And Hafsa says, she's Asma’ the Abyssinian. At that point, that's how she's to be known. So Umar RA says to her, that we preceded you in hijrah. And Asma’ RA, she didn't like that comment from Umar RA. So we have more right to the messenger of Allah SAW than you. So she said to Umar RA, “Wallahi, you had the privilege of being in the companionship of the messenger SAW who fed the hungry amongst you and instructed the ignorant amongst you. Whereas we were far away in the land of Abyssinia among strangers and enemies. And that was all for Allah and his messenger SAW.” And she said to him, “Wallahi, I will not eat or drink until I make mention to Allah's messenger SAW of what you have said. We remained in that land of in constant trouble and fear. And I will talk to Allah's messenger SAW and ask him about, who has more right to him. I will not lie or deviate or add anything to what you have said.” So Rasulullah SAW comes, and she says, “Ya Rasulullah, Umar RA says so and so. He says that we preceded you to the migration. Therefore, we have more right to you than those from Abyssinia.” And the Prophet SAW says that “His right is not more than yours. For him and his companions have only one hijrah and you are the people of two hijrahs.” So the Prophet SAW rules in the favour of Asma’, the wife of Ja'far in that sense and says you are the people of two hijrahs. What a noble deed to do. 

Remember the Prophet SAW mentioned that Islam wipes away everything that comes before it. Hajj mabroor wipes away everything that comes before it. Hijrah wipes away everything that comes before it. And these were the people that made the two most noble hijrahs, the hijrah to Abyssinia as well as the hijrah to Medina, all for the sake of Allah SWT. So he said and this is in Al-Bukhari that the Prophet SAW said to Ja'far RA that no one resembles me more in both physical appearance as well as character than you O Ja'far. What about Abu Hurairah RA who knew so many of the companions? What does he say about Ja'far RA? He says that none has put on sandals nor worn them, nor ridden a mount or a camel after the messenger of Allah SAW that is better than Ja'far ibn Abi Talib. That's a high level of praise that there is no person that you see after the Prophet SAW. And there are reasons for this, right? This wasn't just because of the way that he looked and some of these characteristics in the vague sense. There are reasons for this. Abu Hurairah RA says that we used to call Ja'far RA the father of the poor. So when we would come to him, he would draw us close to him as long as he was present. He said one day we came to him and we could not find anything with him. That Ja'far RA was the father of the poor in that he used to come close to them and he would give everything that he had. And he said we came to him one day and he couldn't find anything. So all he had was a jar of honey and he broke the jar. And so we began to lick the portion of honey off of what was left from what Ja'far RA had. So anything he had, he gave it. 

And he says in another narration that Ja'far RA used to love the poor. And he would sit with them and he would talk to them and they would talk to him. And in this narration, though this narration has a weakness in its chain, in Ibn Majah, that the Prophet SAW gave him the nickname of the father of the poor. But this is important here to mention because if the Prophet SAW used to ask Allah SWT for the quality of the love of the poor, and the Prophet SAW says about Ja'far RA that he is the most like me in character. Then you can imagine how noble this particular quality is. When you live in a society of the likes of Abu Bakr and Uthman and Abdurrahman ibn Auf, and those people that were distinguished for their generosity, and you become known for your love of the poor. Notice that it wasn't that Ja'far RA was the most generous in the sense that he gave more money than the others. No, it was the love of the poor that Ja'far RA had, that Abu Huraira RA being from the poor, appreciated and was able to distinguish from even the most noble companions that were around Ja'far RA in that very short time. So he was distinguished for his love of the poor, spending time with the poor, talking to them, them talking to him, sharing whatever he had with them, and that is what Abu Huraira RA took note of. 

And so you see the humility of Ja'far RA, the empathy of Ja'far RA. This was despite his eloquence, this was despite his closeness to the Prophet SAW, this was despite the leadership position that he had. He did not come into Medina with an arrogant posture. He came into Medina as humble as when he embraced Islam and demonstrating that same mercy, that the mercy to the world's Muhammad SAW was known for. And then, it was only a short time after that he's going to take part in his first battle alongside or under the command of the Prophet SAW, and that is the battle of Mu'tah, which is a difficult battle against the Byzantines who had mobilized to attack the Muslims or they had attacked one of the emissaries, one of the ambassadors of the Prophet SAW. And the Prophet SAW dispatches an army to confront the Byzantines. And the Prophet SAW sends in that battle, it's not that Ja’far had a long time, but Ja’far is distinguished, he sends in that battle the first commander Zayd ibn Haritha, the beloved one of the Prophet SAW. And the Prophet SAW says that if Zayd is killed, Ja’far should take command. So if Zayd is killed, then you immediately look to Ja’far and he is your commander. And if Ja’far is killed, then you appoint Abdullah ibn Rawaha. And if Abdullah ibn Rawaha is killed, then choose amongst you at that moment the best commander, right? Make a judgment call at that moment. 

Some of the ulama, they mentioned that the fact that the Prophet SAW was even mentioning these possibilities was different, right? That the Prophet SAW was talking about all these different scenarios and that if this person dies, appoint this person, if this person dies, appoint this person. So some of the ulama said that was unique and that was different about this battle. And it's as if the Prophet SAW knew, he was giving an indication that this was going to be a difficult battle, a battle that was not like the other battles that they would experience. So they go out to Mu'tah, which is in Jordan today. And when they get to Mu'tah, the Muslim army finds that there are over a hundred thousand men that have been amassed by the Byzantines. And they are more skilled warriors, and this is meant to be a statement sent to the Muslims by the Byzantine empire, right? The Muslim army was anywhere from 25,000 to 30,000 men. So it was one-fourth of the size and they were in the territory of the Byzantines, because this is now under Byzantine territory. So they go to fight the Byzantines in this battle in Mu'tah. Zayd ibn Harithah, the beloved one of the Prophet SAW, was killed almost immediately. He's one of the first people to die. Ja'far RA assumes the command and Ja'far, who had just made the hijrah to Medina to be in the companionship of the Prophet SAW, is experiencing this difficult battle and he fights so bravely. He penetrates deep into their forces. He is swinging his sword right and left and he is suffering all sorts of wounds along the way. But Ja'far RA is not giving up until Ja'far RA has both of his arms cut off. I mean this is a difficult way for a person to be slain. So he has both of his arms cut off and then he is stabbed and killed with over 70 wounds to his body and he passes away. He becomes a shaheed, a martyr in the battle of Mu'tah. Abdullah ibn Rawaha takes the next command. He goes forth and he dies. 

At that point Khalid ibn al-Walid, who had just accepted Islam. He is chosen as the commander, and he is able to rearrange the army to attack from different directions and to basically send off the Byzantine forces and to return back to Medina with what is left of the Muslim army. And so the nightmare and what the Prophet SAW was mentioning as a possibility of Zayd going down and then Ja'far going down and then Abdullah ibn Rawaha going down had actually happened. Aisha RA, she says that the Prophet SAW was waiting anxiously for the news of Mu'tah. It's as if he felt something SAW about this particular battle. And when the news came, she says that when the news came of the death of Ja'far, we saw this grief overcome the face of the Prophet SAW. He had just gotten his cousin back to Medina, his brother back who resembled him most in appearance and character. He loved him so deeply and he just got him back. On top of this Zayd, his son right, who in Jahiliyya, who he adopted as a son and his beloved one also was killed in this battle. So the Prophet SAW lost Zayd and Ja'far. That's a major hit to the family of the Prophet SAW, and to the heart of the Prophet SAW. And this is one of the most human moments or one of the ways that you see the heart of the Prophet SAW really shine in a difficult moment. 

It's a narration in Tabaqat ibn Sa'ad by Asma’ RA herself who talks about waiting for Ja'far to come home. They just moved to Medina. Asma’ RA knows that Ja'far has gone out to battle. She knows that the army is on its way back from battle. What she doesn't know is that her husband is dead. And if you can imagine if Ja'far was known for having a character that most resembled the character of the Prophet SAW and he had such compassion for the poor in Medina that he barely knew but would sit with them and love them and listen to them and be listened to by them. Imagine what he was like as a husband. The way I mean, think about how the Prophet SAW is described as being so much more in his home than the perfection even that he showed outside of his home. And imagine how much Asma’ loved him. They spent 12 years in a foreign land together, raised their family as this minority, came to Medina, were now in the presence of the Prophet SAW and she is witnessing the best of her husband Ja'far RA.

So what does Asma’ say? She says that when the army was coming back, she said I got myself ready. I went and I wore a new set of clothes. I perfumed myself. I took all the children of Ja'far. I bathed them. I clothed them. I gave them the best of perfume. I got them ready. She said I cooked the best meal. I prepared the dough. I was waiting for my husband to come back. And imagine the Prophet SAW has to tell her that your husband's not coming back. I mean you talk about the difficulty of breaking the news, and the Prophet SAW himself is really hurting over the death of Ja'far. So she says that when Rasulullah SAW came to us then, she said that I opened the door and she said that his face looked off. He looked sad and I was anxious, but I was afraid to even ask him what happened. But you could see in the Prophet SAW, his expressions were in his face SAW. You could tell that something was wrong. But she said I didn't want to ask him because I was afraid he would tell me what I didn't want to hear. So she said I didn't want to hear. So the Prophet SAW greeted me and he said bring me Ja'far's children. And she said that when they came, the Prophet SAW, they crowded around him, and they were so happy. They loved the Prophet SAW. They loved to see him. He is an uncle to them. He is so beloved to them. So she said each one of them wanting to claim him for themselves. So each one of them jumping on the Prophet SAW. This was the way that the Prophet SAW was as an uncle, as a brother, as a messenger SAW. So they each jumped on the Prophet SAW and she says that the Prophet SAW, he grabbed each one of them. And she uses these words. She said that he would put his nose in their hair. He was smelling them SAW. 

And the Prophet SAW could not contain his tears as he was holding the children of Ja'far RA. So Asma’ RA says, I asked the Prophet SAW, have you heard anything about Ja'far? Because she now knows something is wrong and the Prophet SAW is unable to hide it because he's grabbing the kids and he's sniffing their hair and he's crying SAW. So the Prophet SAW says that he's been killed. And when he said that to me, Asma’ is speaking, she said that I screamed, I shouted. And the Prophet SAW tried to calm me down and he told me to not wail, to not scream. And he SAW, he left the home, and this is where we actually find the famous narration where the Prophet SAW said, “Make food for the family of Ja'far RA because they are busy with the news that has come to them.” So this is where we find the sunnah of taking care of the family when they are dealing with death in the family. And, we see the opposite today, by the way. I mean, the sunnah is to prepare food for the family, not to make the family prepare food or be burdened with hosting other people. We do the complete opposite. We burden the family. The Prophet SAW was saying, prepare food for them, take care of their needs, because they're busy right now. They've been struck with news that keeps them busy. So give them space. And, we do the complete opposite of the sunnah, but this is where we actually find the narration about how to take care of the family of the deceased. 

The Prophet SAW, he then says the beautiful words that he saw something. He said, I saw Ja'far RA flying in Jannah with the angels. What a beautiful sight to see. The Prophet SAW saw many things. He saw Waraqa, he saw Zaid ibn Amir as we spoke about, and these were people that he saw in Jannah. But what comfort does it give to the family of Ja'far RA when the Prophet SAW says that I saw him flying in Jannah along with the angels, and hence the nickname, the two-winged person. And this is not a nickname that comes later on in Islam. This is a nickname that the companions knew Ja'far by, the one with two wings because of what the Prophet SAW said, the possessor of two wings. And it's even narrated that Abdullah ibn Umar RA when he used to greet the son of Ja'far, Abdullah ibn Ja'far, who grew up to be a great companion, that he used to say, peace be on to you, oh son of the possessor of two wings. So Ja'far becomes known as the one who flies amongst the angels with his two wings. Some of you might remember, I'd given a talk about my mother, may Allah have mercy on her, May Hashim, almost 10 years ago. I told her story and her family, she was a descendant of Ja'far ibn Abi Talib RA, and I grew up with this image on the wall, actually right next to her bed where everyone from the descendants of Ja'far RA. It's not just the way that they trace their lineage back to who it is from Banu Hashim they trace their lineage to, but they actually have a unique thing for Ja'far RA where they prepare the names on the leather and they trace the lineage back that for their portion of Banu Hashim, they have two wings at the top and growing up it's, I would always look at that on her wall right next to her bed, those two wings of Ja'far RA and then the family of Ja'far RA descending from that. 

So, I mean these people made sacrifices for Islam that we are feeling today, even in our very being of Islam, of being Muslims today in so many different ways. Because Ja'far RA was murdered or martyred during the Prophet's SAW's life, we don't have hadiths narrated by Ja'far RA himself, instead we have a hadith narrated about him by primarily Umm Salama, who was of course in Abyssinia, Abu Huraira bin Mas'ud and his son Abdullah bin Ja'far who we mentioned would grow up to be a famous companion and would narrate many hadith from the Prophet SAW. As for Asma’ bint Umais, may Allah be pleased with her, when we talk about the way that the companions used to marry the widows, Asma’ bint Umais, you might have heard her name already a few times as we're going through the stories of these people Asma’ bint Umais RA after the death of Ja'far was married to none other than Abu Bakr as-Siddiq RA. Abu Bakr marries Asma’ and he has his one son in Islam born to Asma’ bint Umais and he is Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr. She gave birth to Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr at the Miqat as they were on their way to Hajj. When you talk about the Hulayfa, the Miqat in Medina, as you make your way to Hajj, she gave birth to Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr there. She is the woman who performed the ghusl of Abu Bakr as-Siddiq RA when he passed away, and she's also the woman who helped prepare the body of Fatima RA when she passed away. So she married Abu Bakr, she had a son from Abu Bakr, she performed the ghusl of Abu Bakr, and she of course performed as well the ghusl of Fatima RA. 

After that you now have a woman that's been widowed, and she's been married to Ja'far and Abu Bakr. What an incredible and she has children from both of them. That in and of itself is incredible and after that who comes to marry her. When Fatima RA dies, Ali RA sometime afterwards then proposes to her and marries her and it said that Asma’ bint Umais, she turned down a ton of proposals. It's not like she had a shortage of people proposing to her. She had many people proposing to her because of who she was, and she kept turning them down. She's like, who am I going to follow up Ja'far and then Abu Bakr with? But then when Ali came, she accepted his proposal, and she married Ali RA and she'd even live past Ali and she wouldn't marry after Ali RA was martyred. So this woman marries two of the four of these khulafa and there's a beautiful story that takes place. 

It's a funny story but it's a beautiful story and I'll end with it because when she married Abu Bakr, we said she had Muhammad, and she already had a Muhammad from Ja'far too. So she has Muhammad bin Ja'far and she has Muhammad bin Abu Bakr and they're both her sons and now she's married to Ali bin Abi Talib. And Muhammad bin Ja'far and Muhammad bin Abi Bakr get into an argument and Muhammad bin Abi Bakr says to Muhammad bin Ja'far who was older than him, his older half-brother, he says, “I'm better than you, and my father is better than your father.” So he pulled that card. He said Abu Bakr is better than Ja'far and I'm better than you. Now when he says that Ali RA, what's he gonna do here, right? I mean, this is an interesting argument to settle amongst two brothers. So Ali RA says, “Asma’ you solve this one, you judge between these two in what they have said..” So Asma’ RA, she says, “I never saw a young Arab man, a young man as good as Ja'far. Ja'far was the best of the young man. And I never saw an old man better than Abu Bakr..” So she married Ja'far when he was young, she married Abu Bakr when he was old. So she said Ja'far was the best of the young man, Abu Bakr was the best of the elderly man. And Ali RA, he says, you left nothing for us. You praised Abu Bakr, and you praised Ja'far. What about me? So she said that, look, basically what it is, is that you belong to this company of three. And so that in and of itself is nobility and something to be proud of, right? That you belong to this category of three incredible human beings that we know RA.

Abu Bakr and Ja'far and Ali and Asma’ and the children that came from that and the lessons that we take from the treatment of widows, the way the Prophet SAW consoled that family, the way that the community move forward with that family. May Allah SWT have mercy upon Ja'far and be pleased with him and allow us to fly with him in Jannah one day, in the companionship of the Prophet SAW and the righteous that have passed before us, and those that will come after us. May Allah SWT gather us amongst them and with them all in the realm of believing souls, and may Allah SWT purify us from all that would hold us back from having their company. Allahumma ameen. JazakumAllahu khayran. Assalamualaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh.

