We talk about Khadijah RA and Khadijah is the first and the first and the first and the first and the first and the first. In fact, if you were to break down the list of firsts, Khadijah would occupy the first nine which I'll get to, at least about the first nine if you actually get to her virtues. As I said you could start off with her and we could have started off the series, but I wanted to kind of lay the groundwork with some of those that started to have these inclinations towards belief before Khadijah actually receives the Prophet SAW and believes in him and gives him that support that he needed so desperately in those times. But understanding the place of Zayd ibn Amr and then understanding Waraqah, the cousin of Khadijah and the role that he played and now we get to this very special woman. Now my disclaimer for this is that I've done a five hour class on Khadijah, so it's very hard to condense into 40 minutes but I'm going to try to focus particularly on where she distinguishes herself as the first. And so I'm going to omit many of the biographical details about her in light of that and focus on some of the things that a lot of people might not actually know about her. So many people miss certain things about her or the significant elements of her history that have to do with it. Obviously, she is who she is. The Prophet SAW said that the best woman of her time was Maryam, and the best woman of her time was Khadijah. The Prophet SAW included her amongst those who perfected their faith.

When you say perfection of faith, you have to think about all that entails and how hard that is to achieve for someone who is not a prophet of God. To be perfect, have complete perfection in her faith and her character, and you see this as you start to go through her story. So, let's start off with just briefly who she is. She is Khadijah bint Khuwaylid ibn Asad ibn Abdul Uzza ibn Qusay ibn Kilab. From Qusay ibn Kilab all the way up, she has the exact same lineage as the Prophet SAW. So, she has the same lineage as the Prophet peace be upon him, and then it breaks off after Qusay to Abdul Uzza, and then you go into the tree of Khadijah RA. As we mentioned last week, let's see if anyone remembers actually. Her father, was he the oldest son or the youngest son? The youngest. How do we know that? Why did that come up last week? Because her uncle, her uncle who? We said it last week for a reason. Anybody remember? See how attentive people are. Very good. So, we said Naufal is the brother of Khuwaylid. Khuwaylid is the youngest son of Asad. Naufal is the oldest. So Waraqah is the oldest son of Naufal, and Khadijah is the youngest of Khuwaylid, which explains the gap in age between Waraqah and Khadijah. So Waraqah really played much more of a senior role in her life. Waraqah is her cousin but almost like her uncle because of the difference in age. We're talking at least at this point, 25 to 30 years between Waraqah and Khadijah RA. 

So, Khuwaylid was the chief of Banu Asad. He was one of those who defended the Ka’bah in the story of Surat Al-Fil, one of those who was willing to defend the Ka’bah along with Abdul Muttalib, the grandfather of the Prophet SAW. And he also went with Abdul Muttalib, the grandfather of the Prophet SAW to Yemen to congratulate Saif ibn Dhiyazan, who became the ruler of Yemen after the death of Abrahah, and of course, Abrahah was the one who sought to destroy the Ka’bah from Yemen. So, the father of Khadijah, Khuwaylid, is close to Abdul Muttalib, the grandfather of the Prophet SAW. And of course, Abdul Muttalib was the one who took care of the Prophet SAW when he was first born because the Prophet's father had already passed away. So, Abdul Muttalib, the grandfather, and Khuwaylid have a history of being two chiefs living together, yet both of them died relatively early. Khuwaylid died, as we said last week, in the battle of Al-Fijar. Who knows the name of the mother of Khadijah RA? I'll give you a clue, it's the name of one of her daughters, Fatima. So, there are many Fatimas when you actually start to get through it. So, the mother of Khadijah is Fatima bint Zaidah. So, Fatima, the daughter of the Prophet SAW and Khadijah al-Zahra is named after Fatima bint Zaidah. Fatima was also the paternal grandmother of the Prophet SAW, the mother of Abdullah. Her siblings, we mentioned a very famous sibling, Awwam, being the father of Az-Zubayr RA. Az-Zubayr bin Awwam of course is one of the ten promised paradise, so that would make Zubayr her cousin or nephew, we said her siblings. So Zubayr is the nephew of Khadijah. Zubayr has two daughters by the way, named Khadijah al-Kubra and Khadijah al-Sughra. Would name two of his daughters, Khadijah the big and Khadijah the small. Khadijah al-Kubra and Khadijah al-Sughra. Another famous sibling is Hizam, the father of Hakim ibn Hizam, who of course, was the one who played a big role in the seerah of the Prophet SAW. Later on, he narrates many of the narrations of Meccan seerah and about Khadijah RA in particular. There is Hala bint Khuwaylid, the sister of Khadijah RA. Her son Al-As, the son of Hala bint Khuwaylid would marry Zaynab, the daughter of Khadijah and the Prophet SAW. So that's one of the sisters of Khadijah RA as well. And the rest of that obviously is just meant to give you somewhat of a picture of what's happening in Mecca as it comes to the Prophet SAW. Khadijah RA was born 15 years before the Prophet SAW. So she was 15 years older than the Prophet SAW. The Prophet SAW was born in the year 570. So she was born in the year 555, 15 years before the Prophet SAW.

Her name is a really interesting name. It's an extremely unique name. If you look through the early books where they track the names, the names that people would use in the Arab world at the time were pretty common. You see a lot of aunts, moms, and daughters kind of recycling the names over and over and over again. Khadijah is not one of those names. Just like Muhammad SAW is unique only to him, Khadijah is not a name that you find. Khadijah means premature. Khadijah means linguistically premature. And so the indication is that she was born well before the due date. And some of the scholars mention maybe the wisdom of that, she was premature, she was ahead of her time. Truly, as a woman ahead of her time. But as a girl, when she was born, she was born premature. Hence her family called her Khadijah. And so you don't find any Khadijahs before Khadijah. Which is very rare. You find many Fatimas. You don't find many or any Khadijahs in fact before Khadijah RA. So she was born a very premature birth, given the name Khadijah. She was extremely beautiful, well educated, literate, well dressed, sharp, perfect in her behavior, perfect in her character, the most elegant woman of Mecca. She never worshipped idols. Just like the Prophet SAW and Abu Bakr, she was one of those who chose not to worship idols. Part of that is probably the influence of Waraqah bin Naufal who we spoke about last week. That there was this idea, and it was okay for some to not worship the idols, but of course what was prohibited or what would be confronted would be the character or a person like Zayd ibn Amr who would confront idol worship before the Prophet SAW receives the revelation.

She has another nickname. Even before Islam, does anyone know what it is? Tahira. So her nickname was Tahira. So Khadijah was also called Tahira, pure, before Islam. And that was obviously in reference to her character, pure, even before Islam. Khadijah RA, as Urwa narrates, Khadijah RA was known to have never backbite, lied, hurt anyone, or upset anyone. So she was just one of those women that would not mess with anybody, one of those people that just goes through, walks through, does not use her position of authority or strength to hurt anybody. So she had a very gentle, subtle presence which is rare for someone of that level, right? Prominence, beauty, wealth, everything that would make a person arrogant, only contributed to her humility RA even before Islam. She married a man by the name of Abu Hala ibn Zurarah At-Tamimi, that's her first husband. She had two sons from him, Hala and Hind. By the way, there are a lot of Hinds in the seerah. Men and women named Hind. I'll talk about why another time. But Hind ibn Abi Hala, who is the son of Khadijah, the oldest son of Khadijah, has one of the most beautiful descriptions of the Prophet SAW. So he lived to the time of Islam and he described the Prophet, peace be upon him, his physical characteristics, his appearance, his character, and one of the most beautiful descriptions. So if you were to look up Hind ibn Abi Hala's description of the Prophet SAW, it is an incredible description, one of the most prominent descriptions in the books of Syamail. He lived all the way until 36 after Hijrah. So he lived actually well after the Prophet SAW, even, not just Khadijah RA, narrated from Ibn Abbas, Al-Hasan, Al-Husayn, and his son, also Hind. So her first husband, Abu Hala, passed away. She married Atiq ibn A'idh Al-Makhzumi. She had a daughter from him named Hind also, so a son from the first one named Hind. Second husband, she had a daughter named Hind. Also a son named Abdul Uzza, obviously a reference to idolatry, but this one, that doesn't come in any sound narration per se, but some of the books mention a son by the name of Abdul Uzza, and that would not be because of her idol worshipper proving of idolatry, but it would be because that was the name of her grandfather. So maybe a son, Abdul Uzza, from him as well. 

Now this one, this husband passed away also, and he died when she was only 25, so she was already widowed twice at the age of 25 years old, meaning that she would go 15 years, 15 years unmarried after being married to two husbands before the Prophet SAW. Banu Makhzum is considered one of the richest tribes. Does anyone know any famous members from Banu Makhzum? Abu Jahl, Abu Jahl is from Banu Makhzum. Khalid Ibn Al-Walid, and of course, Al-Walid are from Banu Makhzum. So these are very powerful, rich people in society. So when Khadijah RA is 25 years old, she's already widowed, or she's already become a widow twice. Khadijah RA had inherited from both of her parents, she'd inherited from both of her husbands who were both very wealthy, and she was an extremely intelligent, smart businesswoman. So she became not just the richest woman amongst Quraysh, but her caravan, the caravan of Khadijah RA, equalled all of the other caravans of Quraysh. So if you took just her caravan by itself, and you put all of Quraysh's caravans together, hers would outdo all of them. She used to send on the trade routes to Syria and to Yemen sometimes, over 800 camels carrying her goods. So this is a very wealthy woman, a very exquisite, rich woman. Her nickname becomes the princess of Quraysh, the leader of the women of Quraysh, Khadijah the Great. There are so many different nicknames that she acquires along the way, aside from Tahira, which was one that was more prominent and interchangeable with her name, Khadijah, growing up. 

She also, there was a green silk pavilion over her roof. So it's really interesting, if you walked into Mecca, there was a green silk pavilion over her roof. And that wasn't a sign of her wealth; that was actually a sign for the poor who were in need. They knew to go to her house. So she wanted to be very open and clear that she would give her money freely to the orphans, to the poor, to the widows, to the sick. She used to help the poor get married, she used to provide the mahr herself. So she was an extremely generous woman as well. At one point, there's a narration that she had over 400 servants. So this is a woman who is giving to much of society that occupies a great place of prominence in her society. Obviously, because of her humility and her goodness, she also got taken advantage of quite a bit in business, right? So she would employ traders, have people take her caravans to Yemen, to Syria, which were the famous trade routes for the people of Mecca. And often they'd come up short, she knew she was being cheated. And she was looking for an honest merchant that she could entrust with her wealth on those trade routes. So she actually never made the trip to Ash-Sham or to Yemen, but she was looking for someone that she could give that wealth to. 

How does the Prophet SAW enter into this picture? Okay, so how does he even come up in the conversation? The Prophet SAW actual career was not a merchant. What was he? He was a shepherd, right? And he said that all of the Prophets were shepherds. It's one of the ways that Allah taught the Prophet's character, is that all of the Prophets of Allah at some points were shepherds. And so the Prophet SAW was a shepherd, and he was a shepherd primarily for Abu Talib, and taking care of Abu Talib's business as well. Now at the age of 18, the Prophet SAW also started to play the role of being a broker. So in a contract of Mudarabah, where you have a silent partner and an active partner, he would start to be a person who would engage in some of those trades on behalf of a seller. But he, SAW did not go as an adult at this point. After the age of 18, when he started doing this, he didn't go to Syria or Yemen himself to do that. If you remember from the story of Waraqah, Abu Talib took him as a child, and the monk in Syria said, don't bring him around here. And he did not bring him back over there. So when the Prophet SAW grew up, this is only the second time that he's going to go out to Ash-Sham. Now, how does Khadijah come to know about the Prophet SAW? She was sick of being burned in business. She was looking for someone who was honest, who was trustworthy. And she was complaining to her sister Hala about this.

And Hala referred the Prophet SAW to her, saying that he's a shepherd for some of my sheep. So the Prophet SAW was a shepherd for Hala, the sister of Khadijah. And said, he's an extremely trustworthy person. He has high character. Why don't you approach him? So she said, who should I approach? She said, approach his father, Abu Talib. Abu Talib, of course, is the uncle of the Prophet SAW, but plays the role of his father. When she goes to Abu Talib, Abu Talib was initially hesitant. He didn't want to do it. He did not want to let the Prophet SAW go out to do this trade to Ash-Sham, to Syria. But after some convincing, she makes the offer multiple times. Abu Talib accepts the proposition. The Prophet SAW accepts to take her caravan to Ash-Sham for that year. And the person that would be paired off with him, as we said last week, what was his name? Maisarah, who would follow the Prophet SAW on behalf of Khadijah, saw his good character, said that the cloud never left him. When he would take naps, the trees would extend their branches over him. When he would be in the marketplace and they'd say, swear by Al-Lat and Al-Uzza, he would say, I've never sworn by them before. Maisarah, who saw the good character of the Prophet SAW, the honesty of the Prophet SAW. In any case, the Prophet SAW doubled the caravan of Khadijah on that trip. So he did an extremely good job. He was noble, and Maisarah told Khadijah about his good character and about the things that he had seen. And of course, the fact that he's a monotheist also appeals to Khadijah RA, who was a monotheist as well. So Maisarah comes back. The Prophet SAW took Khadijah's caravan out, doubled it, was completely honest, and maintained a great deal of nobility. And Maisarah is bragging about the Prophet SAW. Now, Khadijah RA had trust issues with the merchants, or merchants taking her caravan. She has trust issues getting married now because she doesn't want to get married to someone who's only going to marry her. She doesn't want her to cheat her with all the wealth that she has. So she doesn't trust people for marriage. So she's been unmarried now for over a decade. The Prophet SAW is also unmarried. 

And there's a woman who puts the bug in Khadijah's ear. Does anyone know her name? Not Hala now. Nafisa. So Nafisa was a friend of Khadijah. She goes to Khadijah and asks her how's everything. And Khadijah starts talking about the Prophet SAW, this young man, Muhammad, who took her caravan and was so honest and how noble he was. She starts to say all of those things. So Nafisa sees the spark in her eye. And Nafisa says, well, why don't you marry him? Khadijah RA said, I wasn't interested in marriage, and I've been turning people down this whole time. So it's not something I thought of. The Prophet SAW was also turning down all proposals. Why was the Prophet not getting married? What was the main reason why he was not getting married? Anyone know? He had a poor family. He wanted to take care of his family. So he felt indebted to Abu Talib. Again, this is a situation where you have the family living together, different kids, the kids of Abu Talib being transferred here, living with the Prophet SAW. Abu Talib himself was a very poor man, a respected man, but a very poor man. So the Prophet SAW was holding off getting married. She was holding off getting married. And Khadijah RA, I mean obviously, the Prophet SAW from an economic perspective, his class compared to her class, this is a very different class. So Khadijah RA, in a conversation with Nafisa, asks Nafisa to inquire from the Prophet SAW if he's even interested. So Nafisa is the one playing the role here. She heard from Khadijah, she got the, okay she's interested. She goes to the Prophet SAW, she says to the Prophet SAW, why don't you get married? He says, you know, I have to take care for my family, I have to take care of them, but who would you suggest anyway? And Nafisa says, what about a woman with nobility, wealth, beauty, and character? She's got everything. The Prophet SAW said, who? So she said, Khadijah. The Prophet SAW said, why do you think she would marry me? What would make Khadijah RA, the princess of Quraysh, marry me? So Nafisa says, let me ask her. So Nafisa goes back to Khadijah, Khadijah sends the proposal. Abu Talib comes back with the Prophet SAW, and who conducts the marriage? Come on, Waraqah. Good, just want to make sure you all were paying attention last week. 

So think about this, Tahira, the pure one, marries Al-Amin, the truthful one. Their nicknames, Tahira and Al-Amin. And we mentioned last week, the dream that Khadijah RA had of the sun descending into her home. And Waraqah told Khadijah that this would be, that you would marry a noble man or a prophet. Now, I want to give you some perspective here because it's important, about how history changes now. Who had Khadijah received proposals from before the Prophet SAW? Abu Jahl, Abu Sufyan, Uqbah bin Abi Mu'it. Three people who would oppose, of course, the only one who lived to accept Islam would be Abu Sufyan. But three of the fiercest enemies of the Prophet SAW when he received prophethood. Three powerful, arrogant men, right? Khadijah did not want any part of them. Despite the strength, despite the nobility, the wealth, all the power that they had in society. She turned down proposals from all three of them, which is unheard of. If you live in Meccan society, you don't turn down a proposal from Abu Jahl. Who at that time was not called the father of ignorance, he was Amr ibn Hisham, Abu al-Hakam, the father of wisdom, powerful, strong, noble. Noble in many ways, a leader, right? Turns down all of them. Imagine the trajectory of history if Khadijah marries one of them instead, which was the expected route for Khadijah. So Khadijah RA did not do that. Why did she marry the Prophet SAW? For what reason? Was it because of how handsome he was? He was very handsome. Was it because of his lineage? Lineage was a big thing to the Arabs. It was because of character. And she told the Prophet SAW, look, the reason why I fell for you, I wanted you, I desired you, is because of your noble character and your truthful tongue. The two things I noticed about you, your good character, your truthful tongue. That's what attracted me to you, Ya Muhammad SAW. 

And this is acting upon revelation before it comes. The Prophet SAW said, “If someone comes to you with religion and character, you marry that person.” You marry that person. You look for those things. Obviously, religion is ambiguous at this point. Character is not ambiguous. And what drew Khadijah to the Prophet SAW was his character. This is what the scholars say, that Allah found you poor and He enriched you, He put you in a place of success. That Khadijah RA, marrying the Prophet SAW, was special. 40 years old, she was 40, he was 25. And the Prophet SAW, through his marriage to Khadijah, his place in society changed significantly. For one, it freed him up significantly to play a more important role in society. They're a wealthy couple at this point. The second thing, it gave the Prophet SAW access to the elites that he did not have before. And that would play an important role in his da'wah. That would play an important role in his call. Now the Prophet, peace be upon him already attained a position due to his nobility and his character. People already knew him as a good man and loved him and respected him. But now, being married to Khadijah, gives him a different status in society altogether. So he moves into the house of Khadijah RA. After five years of marriage, they had six children. Who can name all the children by the way? Alright, it's too late for you guys. So Zainab, Ruqayya, Umm Kulthum, Fatima, Al Qasim, and Abdullah. Four daughters, Zainab, Ruqayya, Umm Kulthum, Fatima, Qasim, and Abdullah. According to a narration from Urwa, Khadijah named the girls, the Prophet SAW named the boys.

So you have six children who come from this. And not just six children that come into this household, you also have other people who live in this house. Who else lives in this home? What's that? So some of Khadijah's previous children also live with the Prophet SAW and Khadijah. I just want you to get an idea of how many kids are in this home. Okay, who else? Someone just said it, I heard someone say it. Zayd Ibn Haritha. So Zayd Ibn Haritha was actually, we'll talk about Zayd in detail at some point, but Zayd was captured, enslaved, and then bought by Hakim ibn Hizam, gifted to Khadijah RA. The Prophet SAW saw Zaid, and the Prophet SAW immediately loved this young man. Khadijah RA gifted Zayd to the Prophet SAW, who freed Zayd and adopted him as a son. So Zayd became Zayd Ibn Muhammad. Did I lose you all? Hakim ibn Hizam, the nephew of Khadijah, gifted Zayd to Khadijah. Khadijah gifted Zayd to the Prophet SAW, the Prophet SAW freed him and took him as a son instead. So he was the adopted son, known as the beloved one of the Messenger of Allah SAW. Who else is in this household? What's that? Umm Ayman? Not exactly. Not exactly. Not living in the household. Yeah. Not Zubayr. Zubayr was actually being cared for by Naufal. Not Anas. Anas is Medina. Later, later. Ali. Why did you all forget Ali? What's going on here? Ali RA. 

So when the Prophet SAW moved to the house of Khadijah, obviously his economic status changed and his heart was still with Abu Talib. That's why he didn't want to get married in the first place. He didn't want to leave Abu Talib in a bad situation. So Abu Talib had a hard time caring for his own children. So Hamza RA took Ja'far Ibn Abi Talib. The Prophet SAW took Ali Ibn Abi Talib. So Ja'far was raised in the home of Hamza, and Ali was raised in the home of the Prophet SAW. So this is a pretty full house. Right? Between the Prophet SAW and Khadijah and all of these children. And the way that this relationship goes for the next 15 years before Islam comes into the picture is this model relationship. They absolutely loved each other. They only had one argument one time. And the argument was that Khadijah RA asked the Prophet SAW to attend a gathering of some of the relatives. And the Prophet SAW said to Khadijah, I will never worship Uzza. I will never worship Al-Lat, the idols. And Khadijah was saying, forget about Lat, forget about Uzza. Meaning that Khadijah wanted the Prophet SAW to go to one of those gatherings just to be with the relatives. And the Prophet SAW did not want to attend any of the gatherings where the idols would be worshipped. So that's the only time that they had an argument was over that. 

One of the narrations that took place at this time is that Khadijah loved to make the Prophet SAW happy. And so when she met Halima Sa'diyah. Halima was the woman who breastfed the Prophet SAW, who cared for the Prophet SAW as a child. When Khadijah met Halima Sa'diyah and she saw the way the Prophet SAW loved Halima Sa'diyah like a mother, Khadijah RA gifted her with 40 sheep and a camel. And that was the habit of Khadijah. It gives you some context. If she met someone who helped the Prophet SAW as a child, or when he was young, or when he was destitute, Khadijah would spend on them. She would gift them for what they did for the Prophet SAW. So it gives you some context to the Prophet SAW repaying that favour later on after the death of Khadijah. To spend on Khadijah's friends. Khadijah spent on the friends of the Prophet SAW. Anyone who took care of the Prophet SAW or who loved the Prophet SAW or who the Prophet SAW loved. If Khadijah saw it, Khadijah RA gave and gave and gave and gave. And of course, this only increased the love of the Prophet SAW for Khadijah RA. Of course, one of the significant incidents before revelation here is when the tribes fought over the placement of the stone in the Ka'bah. Hajar al-Aswad, the black stone in the Ka'bah. And the tribes made an agreement that they would resolve the dispute by whoever walks through the doors next will place the stone together. The Prophet SAW walks through. They said, it's the trustworthy one, the truthful one. We are pleased. And the Prophet SAW came up with a strategy. He said that all of the tribes will put the black stone in the cloth. And all of the tribes will grab a part of that cloth. That way they all place the stone together. And so it solves the dispute of giving favouritism to one tribe over the other. Now of course, that's a position that the Prophet SAW in part occupies now because of who his wife is. Now all of that I just summarized as much as I could and paraphrased. And I hope I didn't lose anyone. To give you this context. To revelation.

The Prophet SAW had the most beautiful wife, the most elegant wife, the most wealthy, noble, comforting, caring, and loved his children. Has an incredible space in society. There is nothing more that a person could want at this point. Meaning from a material perspective. The best moments, the best time of the Prophet's life was 38, 39 years old. This led up to the revelation. When he walks through the streets, he is noble, and everyone recognizes him. He's a peacemaker. When he speaks, everyone listens. They honour him. His family life is good. His societal life is good. He has everything that he could possibly want. And suddenly the Prophet SAW starts to see dreams. This is an important understanding of revelation. The Prophet SAW's revelation starts with true dreams. Suddenly the Messenger of Allah sees something, he wakes up. Sometimes he would tell his family what he saw in the dream. And it would happen exactly as he saw it. So for six months, half a year, the Messenger of Allah SAW kept seeing true dreams. After he sees true dreams, what happens next? Aisha RA says, Allah put the love of seclusion in the heart of the Messenger SAW. Suddenly he loved to pray alone, to seclude himself. To worship in an Abrahamic way. The worship of Waraqah was called Tahannuf, to worship in a Hanifi way. To worship in a monotheistic way. So the Prophet SAW suddenly loved to have long periods of silence and seclusion. And worship that one God actively. And seeking something greater.

But he was called very specifically to that cave in Hira. It's not like he was going next door, or the Prophet SAW would take to another room in the very large house of Khadijah. The Prophet SAW would go climbing all the way up. Which is at least a couple of hours, though Allah knows how long it used to take them. But if any of you have been up to Hira, with the paved way, how long does it take you all? What are your times? About an hour, right? That's if you're walking at a healthy pace, and you don't get attacked by one of the monkeys up there. So it takes about an hour to get up there, with the paved way, with the steps. Imagine back then, no steps. Nothing. That's not taking into consideration the walk to the mountain in the first place. The house of the Messenger SAW and Khadijah, RA, was around the area of Marwah. Walking all the way from there to the mountain, and then up. And being in that cave all by yourself. How long did he used to do this? He used to go up there, SAW, sometimes for a few days, sometimes for a few weeks, and then sometimes an entire month, without coming down. Some of the women started to mock Khadijah. You know, you've given him everything, you've done this for him, and your husband goes away, spends a month up there. What kind of argument are you having with your husband that he goes up to a mountain, right? That's not what was happening, though, right?

But you can imagine the mockery and the words that start to be spread. When you're at that position in society, every move of yours is scrutinized. Why is the Prophet SAW, why is Muhammad SAW going up to a mountain now? What's with this long break? Except Khadijah RA, not only did she not buy into any naysayers, but Khadijah would go up. How old would Khadijah RA have been? 54, 55 years old. Would go up the mountain herself. Take food to the Prophet SAW, bring stuff to him so that he did not have to come back to the home to reload, to replenish his goods. So that he could focus in his worship. She knew that this was sincere devotion and that something was happening, and she wanted to be as supportive as she could. No one told her to do that. Nor is that an expectation the Prophet SAW placed on her. But this is a woman who always exceeds all expectations. She's going up there, taking food, taking drink, taking a blanket. All these things are to make sure that the Prophet SAW is well cared for. And never has to think about coming back down. For any of these things. Only says good things. Only supports him. Only helps him. And then, obviously, you're imagining the climb of a woman with how many children at this point? That has given birth to about 10-11 children. You know, in her late 50s. Walking up a mountain by herself, darkness of the night or the heat of the sun. Either way, it's a harsh climb for you to have to make. And then the Prophet SAW, of course, experiences what he experiences. 

Jibreel AS comes to the Prophet SAW and approaches the Prophet SAW in the cave. It is so significant. First of all, imagine how long the run of the Prophet SAW back down was. I mean, it's not like he saw Jibreel was squeezed, terrified, and he could just jump out. No. He still has to make that whole walk down from the mountain. Goes to Khadijah RA. You cannot underestimate, first and foremost, the significance of the Prophet SAW going to Khadijah first. Why? He could have gone to Abu Bakr, his best friend RA. He could have gone to Abu Talib, his father figure. He could have gone to Waraqah, a person who understands these things himself. The Prophet SAW could have gone to Hamza RA, his uncle and one of his best friends. Hamza plays a dual role of being his uncle. His brother in Ridha, and that they were breastfed together, same age, and his best friend, one of his best friends. Instead, he goes straight to Khadijah RA, knowing that no one is going to reassure him and be more supportive than this woman. No one could possibly, no human being could comfort the Prophet SAW the way that Khadijah RA could comfort the Prophet SAW. And I want you to think of the scene, the Prophet SAW bursts into the home. Tells Khadijah RA, cover me, hold me, embrace me. Khadijah RA does not ask any questions. Allah knows what he just saw. Allah knows, did he get attacked on the way home? What happened? She doesn't ask. The Prophet SAW comes in, sweating, he's shaking, hold me, embrace me. She holds him, she embraces him, she comforts him, SAW. And the hadith actually mentions that the Prophet SAW did not speak for some time, meaning he shook for a little bit, she's just holding him. She's not asking any questions, she's waiting to let the Prophet SAW talk about what happened to him.

And when the Prophet SAW starts to speak, the fear had gone from him, or he stopped shaking at least SAW, at that point, oh Khadijah, what is wrong with me, I'm worried about myself. That's all he said. I'm worried about myself. And he said that the one I saw in my sleep came to me. Because the Prophet SAW had seen Jibreel in a dream before, he recognized him, and now he saw him in the cave, the man whom he saw in his dream. And I saw the one who came to me in my sleep, and that's all, when he says laqad khashitu ala nafsi, what is he telling Khadijah? And by the way, if the Prophet SAW is fabricating something these first few years, don't really add up, because there's a Prophet who's in uncertainty, who's waiting for more guidance, who's looking, who's waiting for months and months and months and months for something to happen. But he's scared, I'm worried about myself. What does he mean when he says I'm worried about myself? What is he talking about? That I'm possessed? Have I lost my mind? What happened to me? Right? So, he's questioning himself. , in those moments, Khadijah could make or break him, can't she? She could say to him, we're going to stop you from going to Hira for some time, go to sleep, talk about this later. She could have said something neutral. She could have said let's go to sleep right now, let me think about it. She could have called someone over. She could have immediately said let's go to Waraqah. She could have said let's go to a doctor.

She could have actually criticized him again, you know, you really shouldn't be going and spending all that time in Hira, you should have been home. I needed you here, you went to Hira. She could have used it as an opportunity, she could have mocked him, anything. There are so many things she could have said to the Prophet SAW in those moments. But, right away, what are the first words she says? And I went through all the narrations, I studied all 19 narrations, I was like, let me find what the first word was. And I want to be sure of it, what was it? Close. First, before that even, she said, no, no way. These are glad tidings. These are glad tidings, this is good news from Allah. And then she said, I swear that Allah would never disgrace you. First thing, she denies, because the Prophet SAW needed to hear, I'm not crazy, did I lose my mind? Am I possessed? Of course not. No way, right? And then, don't be sad. Don't be sad. You know, when something like that happens, that type of traumatic experience, first and foremost, you need that self-assurance, and then you need to be able to see the good news that is hidden in what seems to be a very difficult hardship. Khadijah achieves that in two words with the Prophet SAW. That no, you did not lose your mind, you're not crazy, this is good news. Why? Your Lord would never disgrace you. You think Allah would disgrace a person like that? You think Allah would disgrace a person like you? And then she starts to tell the Prophet SAW what he needs to hear.

Words of reassurance. And they're not just ambiguous words. She starts to mention all these qualities. She said, first and foremost, you are someone who maintains good relations with kin. And you only speak words of truth. You only speak words of truth. Remember, this was one of the qualities that made her want to marry the Prophet SAW in the first place. You're a truthful person. You only speak words of truth. And you help the poor and the destitute. No one who is poor or destitute comes to you except that you help them. You don't just spend on people, you actually carry their burden as well. When people have burdens, you don't just spend on them, you actually carry their burdens as well. And then he says, you entertain your guests. You're even good with your guests. And you assist those who are stricken with calamities. You are always there for those who are in hardship. In these few sentences, that is, the Prophet SAW came down with revelation, Khadijah RA has inspiration. How does she come up with those words? If you were to actually take the time to come up with those words for that moment, you would not be able to come up with better words. She reassured the Prophet SAW in so many different ways. First of all, notice the reasons she mentions that Allah would not disgrace the Prophet SAW, and then compare it to what would come down of the Qur'an later on, over 13 years later, in Surah Al-Baqarah verse 133.

Allah says, righteousness is not that you turn your faces towards the East or the West, but righteousness is one who believes in Allah, the last day, the angels, the book, the Prophets, and gives out of their wealth, in spite of their love for it, to relatives, to orphans, to the needy, to the travellers, to those who ask for help, for the freeing of slaves, and who establishes prayer and gives zakat, those who fulfil their promises when they make promises and those who are patient in poverty and hardship and during struggle. Those are the ones who have been truthful and it is they who are righteous. Khadijah RA, her description of why Allah would not disgrace the Prophet SAW actually already matches up with the Qur'an that would come later on. She could have said Allah would not disgrace you, and she could have said you never worshipped the idols, you did this, you did that. But she mentioned these reasons that actually line up almost exactly with what Allah would describe as righteousness in the Qur'an in Surat al-Baqarah. And also some of the scholars mentioned Khadijah RA, mentioning these things, this confidence that she has in the Messenger SAW is important because no one knows the Prophet SAW like her. This is his only wife. They have been married now for 15 years. No one knows the Prophet SAW better than her. And so those words of confidence coming from your spouse are particularly significant.

This isn't some poet in front of the Ka’bah saying all these words about your wife, your spouse saying that about you. Also, knowing that rich people, wealthy people usually don't do the things that you do. The Prophet SAW was not transformed by his wealth, by the wealth that came to him when he married Khadijah, but instead he used that for more noble things and more truthful and charitable things. And this here makes Khadijah RA not just the first believer. She actually believes in the Prophet SAW before the Prophet SAW is certain of himself. Think about how incredible that is. She's telling the Prophet SAW, before he's sure of himself, that I'm sure of you. That's tasdiq, confirming his truthfulness before even hearing it from him. I'm sure you are upon the truth. I'm sure that Allah would not let you be disgraced. She says let's go to Waraqah. That was her idea to go to Waraqah. Ask the people of knowledge if you don't know any better. And by the way, we mentioned Waraqah made this comment and said that if I live to see when your people run you out, I will support you with everything I have. I will consume myself. I'll stand by your side and fight along your side. You think Khadijah RA sitting there hearing Waraqah say that didn't affect her? Like that's going to be my mission then. Right? I mean if you were to describe Khadijah's support for the Prophet SAW. It is undying support throughout it all. It is what Waraqah desired to do, that Khadijah RA would do. 

After that time, remember there was a pause where Jibreel did not come back for some time. The Prophet SAW was seeing Jibreel AS in human form, in his human figure. But the Prophet SAW was not able to confirm anything at this point. He hadn't been called at this point. Khadijah RA says, if you see Jibreel again, the next time you see him, I want you to tell me. So the Prophet SAW said, “I see him.” Khadijah RA said, “Sit on my right side.” So the Prophet SAW sat on her right side. She said, “Do you see him?” The Prophet SAW said, “Yes.” She said, “Sit on my left side.” She said, “Do you see him?” He said, “Yes.” So then Khadijah RA sat behind him, put her arms around him, and her legs around him. So like he's sitting in her grasp. And then on top of that, she takes off, now it says she removed her khimar, meaning she removed, you know, at that point the women used to wear something on their head. And then obviously when the order came down, then they moved it over and they tied it, right? So she removed her khimar and she held him and she said, “Do you see him?” And the Prophet SAW said, “No.” This is an interesting narration, right? And then she says, “Be firm, this is an angel, not a devil.” That's Khadijah RA. What just happened, right? Even the Prophet SAW, what do you mean? How do you know? Because she was talking about the haya of Jibreel AS, the modesty of this angel. She said that if it were a shaitan, the shaitan would stay around, but Jibreel had modesty and shyness. That this angel would have modesty and shyness, so the angel would not stay if he perceived intimacy or something of that line.

Jibreel AS would give salam from the outside. So Khadijah RA is figuring this out. As a woman, obviously she's the cousin of Waraqah, she's a wise woman, a noble woman, but she's figuring things out herself, and she is guided naturally towards this goodness. And this is what we hear from the Prophet SAW said, there are people who are muhaddathoon, they are just guided to natural goodness by the angels, like Umar al-Khattab RA. It's as if they're receiving revelation because they have certain inclinations. And so, then the Prophet SAW, obviously some time passes, and he does not get the command of revelation. So though he saw Jibreel AS, the Prophet SAW did not get revelation. Again, if he's fabricating this, and if the Prophet SAW was cooking up this story for a very long time, at the age of 40, he would have prepared the groundwork, come out and said, everyone, it has come to me, and he would have had this grand entrance. But there are months passing by. And Khadijah is the one comforting him. And then, the hadith of Jabir ibn Abdullah, where the Prophet SAW went out and he saw Jibreel AS in his full angelic form. This was the first time he saw Jibreel AS in his full angelic form, sitting on a throne between the heavens and the earth, covering the entirety of the horizon, and coming near the Prophet SAW, and the Prophet SAW ran back to Khadijah RA, once again said, zamiluni. Khadijah RA embraced the Prophet SAW, though this time there is a history that happened some time ago, where she knew what must have happened. 

And at that moment, the next revelation of the Qur'an, Surat al-Muddathir. “O you who is wrapped up, stand up and call.” That revelation comes to the Prophet SAW while he's in the arms of Khadijah. Think about how significant that is. That the revelation of Surat al-Muddathir came to the Prophet SAW in the arms of Khadijah RA, O you who is wrapped up, arise and mourn, and your Lord magnify and keep pure your garments and desert the idols, abandon the idols. So when the Prophet SAW sees Jibreel in human form the first time, he goes to her. When he sees him in angelic form, he goes to her again. And Surat al-Muddathir is revealed in her arms RA, and after Surat al-Muddathir came, the Prophet SAW said, “You are the first one I'm calling to this message.” and Khadijah RA said, “And I am the first one to accept this message.” I'm not going to question it. Simply no hesitation, supporting him SAW. So she is the first Muslim, the first believer, the first of many things as I'll say. And the Prophet SAW says that sleep is gone. We're not going to sleep anymore after this. The time of sleep is gone, that time of peace that we had is gone now. That the tribulations that are going to come, that Waraqah warned of, certainly those tribulations will come. The Prophet SAW made his first wudu and his first prayer with Khadijah. The Prophet SAW made his first tawaf with Khadijah. He would pray his qiyam with Khadijah. Khadijah RA sold away her clothes and her goods and spent on the call of the Prophet SAW, spent on the da'wah of the Prophet SAW. 

When the Prophet was boycotted, this is probably the most, this one is heartbreaking. Because you can imagine emotionally what it did to the Prophet SAW. You don't think, as much as he loved Khadijah, you don't think he felt guilty, seeing this man of empathy, seeing the pain that the da'wah was causing her. That suddenly, it's not just him going down, being rejected and pelted and slandered and losing everything. She's losing everything too. But when the boycott happens, when the boycott happened, the boycott was of two tribes, Banu Hashim and Banu Mutallib. Khadijah's not included in either of those tribes. Khadijah technically could have avoided the boycott, meaning she could have stayed on the outside of the ghetto that was created, the area that was created, that was wired off, no one's allowed to go there, prohibited from food and drink. She could have stayed on the outside in the comfort of her home and supported her husband from there. But Khadijah insisted on being with the Prophet SAW when the boycott of Banu Hashim and Banu Mutallib happened, and on top of that Khadijah RA used what she had of connection to her nephew, Hakim ibn Hizam RA, to secretly sneak in food, because the people were starving. So Khadijah used her connection to sneak food into the area of the boycott. And what did Khadijah eat? Khadijah RA, a woman who lived her entire life in wealth, beauty, and elegance, she ate grass to survive. So even the food that came in, she donated it, she distributed it, she spent it on everyone else. Complete selflessness. Imagine the Prophet SAW looking at her, becoming frail, losing her weight, becoming bony, becoming sick all the time all of a sudden. She was an old woman at this point, right? She's now in her 60s. And not only that, but never once complains. This is the amazing thing about her. She never once says, why is this happening to me? You did this to me. None of that. Complete acceptance of that which she has. 

And there's a narration from Ibn Sunni that Jibreel AS met Khadijah RA in the streets in the form of a man, which we know in the narrations of hadith that sometimes Allah would send an angel in the form of a man that would ask a question about the condition of the people, about how they were doing. That Jibreel AS asked Khadijah RA about her situation and the Prophet SAW, and she said nothing but praise of the Prophet and gratitude to Allah. And then obviously in the last moments of Khadijah, when she's about to die, this woman who believed in him, gave him everything, loved him, supported him, encouraged him, now 25 years. So the Prophet SAW married her at 25, and these 25 years, one of the only monogamous marriages in Mecca. He's married to her only. Prophet SAW never had a jariah, never had a wife, nothing. Just her. And Khadijah RA is losing herself, dying, literally from eating grass in a boycott that she is voluntarily participating in. She is voluntarily in that boycott. 

And then the hadith in al-Bukhari from Abu Huraira RA, that Jibreel AS came to the Prophet SAW sitting in his living room, this is during the last days. And he says to the Prophet SAW, O Messenger of Allah, this is Khadijah coming to you. She's carrying a dish that has some soup or some food, or some drink. And he says to her, when she comes to you, tell her that Allah sends salam to you. Allah, give her salam from her Lord. , Jibreel conveying a salam specific to Khadijah from Allah. Another first, the first person to receive salam from Allah in this ummah. Not just that, and give Khadijah my salam too. So tell her Allah sends salam, and tell her that Jibreel AS sends his salam, and give her the glad tidings of a pearl palace, a palace made of pearls in paradise, and there will be no noise or fatigue in that home. Imam Suhaili says, the pearls, because Khadijah gave away all of her pearls for the sake of Allah. She didn't have any more jewellery, she didn't have any more of that goodness, so you're going to have a whole house of those jewels, the most expensive pearls that you gave away, you spent for the sake of Allah. No noise, or exhaustion, or fatigue. And Suhaili says because she never raised her voice at the Prophet SAW once, nor did she ever tire him. She always was a source of peace, comfort, and tranquillity to him. So Allah would give her eternal tranquillity as a result of that. No more noise, no exhaustion. And some of the scholars mention that because of the taunting of the people of Mecca, at this point now, you don't walk out of your house without the people of Mecca yelling at you, cursing you, throwing things at you, harassing you.

So, give her the glad tidings of a palace in paradise made of pearls, she will hear no noise and no fatigue within. Khadijah RA walks in, she's holding this tray, the Prophet SAW says Allah sends his salam to you. Or he says, Jibreel is here, and he says that Allah sends salam to you, and Jibreel sends salam to you, and gives you the glad tidings of a home in paradise made of pearls. There is no noise and no fatigue therein. Khadijah RA smiles, she says, Allah is the source of salam, the source of peace. And to Jibreel, my salam. And though the Prophet SAW did not give salam to her per se, she said, and upon you, O Messenger of Allah, the peace and the mercy of Allah. So, she added the Prophet SAW in her response. This is Jibreel who came to the Prophet SAW, sent him into the arms of Khadijah twice, and now comes to the Prophet SAW to tell the Prophet SAW basically that Khadijah's time is wrapping up. This was a sign, as Ibn Hajar says, that the time of Khadijah was near, that she was about to die. And Abu Talib had died, this is in the year 620, Abu Talib died at the age of 80 years old. Khadijah RA died only, according to some narrations, three days after Abu Talib. Three days. Imagine that hardship. Your father figure, the only person who protected you and cared for you, he dies. And then your emotional support, your mental support, your love, Khadijah RA dies right after at the age of 65. This was in Ramadan, but Ramadan had not yet become a month of fasting.

So, she actually passed away in Ramadan, in that year of 620, and they were married at that point for 25 years. The narrations are very painful to go through here, because the Prophet SAW buried her himself. So, he himself went into the grave of Khadijah RA, and he received the body of Khadijah RA. And there was no ghusl or janaza yet, but you can imagine that this was the woman that held the Prophet SAW and comforted him when revelation came to him. And now the Prophet SAW is comforting Khadijah RA, putting her into the grave, and how painful that must have been for the Prophet SAW. That's an experience that never leaves him, SAW. Right? That he has to do that. And her grave is just a stone's throw from Abu Talib's grave, by the way. It's in Jannatul Mu'alla. If you go to Jannatul Mu'alla in Mecca, it's right next to it, and the Prophet SAW is burying Khadijah RA, and receiving her in the grave himself, SAW, and placing her there and comforting her for the last time. That woman whose arms grabbed the Prophet SAW and comforted him so many times, and now he's grabbing her lifeless body, a body that strove. I mean, she became that way, frail, because of her support of the Prophet SAW, and burying her there, and making dua in a very organic way, just supplicating to Allah SWT for mercy upon her. Ammar ibn Yasir says that we feared for the Prophet SAW after her death, that he would die soon after, from the amount of grief that he had, SAW, when she passed away. Hamad ibn Salama said the people left the Prophet SAW alone, because they feared to ask him anything, because they did not want to add to his stress, because they felt like he would die.

They legitimately feared. You know when you see an elderly couple, sometimes when an elderly person passes away, you fear what would happen to the next one. That's how they felt about the Prophet SAW. They feared that he would die very soon, because he could not bear the grief of Khadijah RA. The Prophet SAW used to be heard loudly weeping at night in his home, consoling Fatima RA, his only daughter that was left with him in the home, SAW. And even after she passed away, most of the narrations about Khadijah are from Aisha RA. Why? Because Aisha RA said that I was never jealous of a woman the way I was jealous of Khadijah, and I never even met her. The dead wife of the Prophet SAW, she said I was so jealous of her. And she said every day, 13 years after his death, she said wallahi a day did not pass except that he mentioned her. You imagine that? 13 years with everything going on. The Badr, the Uhud, the Khandaq, the Fath, all that stuff. And he would never go a day without mentioning her. She says he would not leave his home in the morning until he mentioned Khadijah RA. He would praise her. 

So one day the Prophet SAW was going on and on about her and she said I became overcome with my jealousy. And that's when she said that I stood up and I said to the Prophet SAW, hasn't Allah given you someone better than this toothless woman, old woman from Quraysh? Like she pushed her luck. She said I said to the Prophet SAW. Called her the old woman, toothless woman of Quraysh. Didn't Allah give you someone better than her? And she said that the Prophet SAW, his face changed in a way that it would not change except revelation was coming to him. That's the power of the face change of the Prophet SAW. As if the Quran was being revealed to him. She said he was angry, his hair stood SAW. And he said to her, he did not belittle Aisha. And notice Aisha is the one narrating this. This is beautiful because our mother Aisha narrates this to show the virtues of Khadijah. To show the virtues of Khadijah and the character of the Prophet SAW. She said the Prophet SAW stood up and he said, I swear by Allah, Allah did not replace her with someone better than her. She believed in me when everyone else disbelieved. So, you talk about the first. She considered me truthful when other people considered me to be a liar. She spent her money on me. She didn't just give me these empty words, she spent her money on me when other people held back. And Allah gave me children through her. And He did not give me children through other women. That this is the mother of my children, she's all this to me. No, Allah did not give me someone better than her. And Aisha RA said, I knew from that moment never to push that button again. Never cross that line of saying anything about Khadijah. Khadijah was off-limits for the Prophet SAW. 

She said, anytime the Prophet SAW slaughtered some sheep, he would take a few pieces of the sheep, he'd put it to the side, and he'd tell someone, go send it to the friends of Khadijah. And when Hala, the sister of Khadijah, when the Prophet SAW would hear her voice, the Prophet SAW would peak. And he would look around and he would say, O Allah let it be Hala. Meaning, I hope I'm actually hearing because Hala had the voice of Khadijah. So he wanted to be reminded. So Aisha said, so they would sit together and they would remember Khadijah. Hours and hours just remembering Khadijah. So the Prophet SAW just longed for any memory of Khadijah RA. Aisha says, one time this old woman came to the house, and the Prophet SAW treated her with so much kindness, he emptied the whole house for her, and I thought she was just a beggar in the street or something. So I said, you greeted this elderly person like that? And the Prophet SAW said, she used to come to us during the days of Khadijah RA. So I remember seeing her during the days of Khadijah RA. And this is a beautiful thing. Aisha RA said, and the reason why I was jealous of her, this is also important, she said, that Allah had actually commanded the Prophet SAW to give her the glad tidings of a home in paradise. So Aisha longed for that as well. I know I took long. 

I'll just mention these last two stories which I think are very important. When the Prophet SAW saw the necklace of Khadijah RA, the Prophet's daughter Zaynab al-Kubra was married to Abu al-As ibn al-Rabi', and Abu al-As was a good man, but he didn't accept Islam because of tribal affiliations. And so he fought on the day of Badr but he didn't fight hard. He kind of kept his weapons to the side, just went out with the people on the day of Badr, just because he had to as a matter of formality. And he was captured. And when the Prophet SAW saw him, the Prophet SAW was hurt. Obviously the Prophet SAW was hurt seeing a lot of people but this is his son-in-law. And he wanted to be fair. I'm not going to treat my uncle al-Abbas or my son-in-law differently. They're all treated the same way. And they ransomed their prisoners with gold or wealth or if they had nothing, they would teach them how to read. And the Prophet SAW said if you can teach 10 Muslims how to read or write, you can go. So he wanted just to establish something. And then the Prophet SAW is presented with this necklace. And it was a necklace that Khadijah gave to Zaynab. And the Prophet SAW saw that necklace and he cried for a while. And the Sahaba did not know why he was crying. So he sat down and he wept for some time SAW. This is years later. And then he said SAW, after crying for some time, he said, listen if you want, please release her prisoner and return her gold too. Return her necklace to her too. And she didn't even ask for the necklace back. But the Prophet SAW said, go ahead and return her necklace to her as well. Even though she only wanted her husband back, the Prophet SAW said send it back. 

Finally, when the Prophet SAW comes back to Mecca. Fath Mecca, victorious. After all that had happened the conquest of Mecca, coming back to the same place where he was persecuted. The persecution that led to the death of Khadijah. And the people invite the Prophet SAW to stay in these nicer homes. Stay in the home of Al Abbas. Stay in the home of Abu Sufyan. Stay in some of the nicer homes in Mecca. So they keep asking the Prophet SAW where are you going to go? Where are you going to go? Where did he go? He pitched a tent next to the grave of Khadijah.  He said take me to Hajun. He didn't even go to the home that they used to live in. He pitched the tent near the grave of Khadijah. This is a woman who never prayed Fajr, Dhuhr, Asr, Maghrib, Isha. This is a woman who never fasted during Ramadan. This is a woman who did not see Islam formulate as it did post-Medina. But it's her sacrifice in the beginning that makes it all happen. She is what the Prophet SAW needed throughout those moments. He had no one like her. There is literally no equivalent to her. So anyway, she's the first mother of the believers. First wife of the Prophet SAW. First to believe. The first Muslim. First person to receive the glad tidings of Jannah. The first one to receive salam from Allah. The first one to receive salam from Jibreel AS. The first one to worship with the Prophet SAW in prayer. The first one to do Tawaf with the Prophet SAW. Her support of the Prophet SAW is not just inspiring. But if you took all of the ayat about how you're supposed to support the Prophet SAW, she manifests them. So she spent on him, she loved him, she loved what he loved, she believed in him. Everything that's told to us about how to treat the Prophet SAW, she did that. Her natural guidance to good. She is perfection in every way. Literally perfect in her Iman. 

And I want to end with just this one hadith. It's a simple statement. The Prophet SAW says, I swear that I was blessed with her love. Allah blessed me with her love. Like her love was a gift to me, it was rizq. It’s like something you say about someone you don't deserve. Right, like it's rizq. I don't know how I got it. But I got it somehow. Allah blessed me with her love. I needed that love. I needed that person to be able to get through it. May Allah reward her for her sacrifice. May Allah reward her for her struggle. And you can imagine that as the Prophet SAW passed from this world, from the lap of Aisha RA, his soul ascending with Jibreel AS, into the realm of souls, we can only imagine who he probably wanted to see first, amongst the souls of the believers to be gathered with at that point. We ask Allah to gather us with him SAW, with our first mother and his first love Khadijah RA. We ask Allah SWT to make us from the sabiqoon. Allahuma ameen.

