As-salamu alaikum wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh everyone. Bismillah walhamdulillah wa salatu wasalamu ala rasulullah wa ala alihi wa sahbihi wa man walah. 

Tonight, we're going to be continuing with the first, and we now get into the life of Saad ibn Abi Waqqas RA, who, of course, is one of the ten that was promised paradise. Now, just like with some of the other companions, we're not going to cover in detail his life after the death of the Prophet SAW, but just some of the qualities and how they played out as things went on. But really focusing on how he comes into the story of the Prophet SAW and to the early story of al-Islam. 

So, Saad ibn Abi Waqqas RA is from the tribe of Zuhra, Banu Zuhra. And he is related to the Prophet SAW specifically through his grandfather, who is the brother of the father of the mother of the Prophet SAW. I know it's probably hard for you to see all that, so let me explain it a little bit better. The Prophet SAW's mother of course is Amina bint Wahab and Saad RA's grandfather is Wahab, the brother of Wahab. So, Saad ibn Abi Waqqas ibn Wahab and the Prophet SAW of course who is the son of Amina bint Wahab. Wahab and Wahab are brothers, hence the Prophet SAW would say, “This is my maternal uncle”. When he would look at Saad, so let one of you show me his maternal uncle. Who can have an uncle like this? So Saad RA is related to the Prophet SAW once again; he is his maternal uncle in that sense. However, he is at least 20 years younger than the Prophet SAW. I know that sometimes when the narration gets quoted, there is this idea of Saad RA as an elderly man in the life of the Prophet SAW.

But of course, when we say he is the uncle, it is only in that sense, and he was a teenager when the Prophet SAW received revelation. So let's go through his story. His nickname was Abu Ishaq. So, if you know someone who is named Saad who is also Abu Ishaq, this is, of course, very common, especially with some of the mashayikh. We have our own Shaykh Saad Abu Ishaq here in Dallas, alhamdulillah. You have many Shaykh Saad Abu Ishaq's in different places, some famous and some not as much. But this comes from Saad RA himself. 

And when the Prophet SAW is receiving revelation, the position of Saad in society is the following. Saad RA was someone who used to make bows and arrows. So, we talked about Khabbab and how skilled Khabbab RA was in making fine swords for people. Saad RA was specifically known for making bow and arrows, and at the same time, he himself was a great archer; he was someone who was known for his genius in that sense in archery, and of course, that would come to play in Islam. He was a teenager; his father had already passed away. And so, while he's making these bow and arrows, and he's someone who's recognized for his genius, he's someone who's recognized for his archery himself, he's someone who's recognized for the vision that he had RA in the sense of his archery. 

He also had a unique appearance. Saad RA was described in the physical appearance as someone who looked like a lion. He was a lion in that not necessarily in his strength, in his physical makeup, but literally in regards to the amount of hair that he had. He was short, very dark, very you know had a lot of hair on his body, had long hair, and had a lot of strength.  And again, you know he's someone who is known for his archery, his skill in archery. 

So how does he come into the life of the Prophet SAW in the sense of Islam? He's someone who is very honest, who is considered from the weak of Mecca, not necessarily in that Saad RA was from those who are enslaved, they're from those who are poor or who are you know going through certain things, but that Saad RA is not someone who has power in society. Despite, of course, not coming from a lowly tribe. Saad RA, in a narration from his daughter Aisha, she says, describing, and this is in some of the books of seerah, that Saad RA describes having this dream. He says, “I saw in my dream before I became Muslim, as if I am in this wide dark plane, I don't see anything. So, I just see darkness everywhere.” And you’ll notice many of the early Muslims, especially that first group that first batch, they saw something of a dream before they came to the Prophet SAW. So, he's seeing this dream where it's just complete pitch black, it's complete darkness. He said, “Suddenly this full moon appeared. So, I followed the moon.” And he said at that point, “I'm looking to see who is in front of me or who has reached the moon prior to me”. So, I go, and I follow the moon in my dream. And he says, suddenly I look, and I see Zayd ibn Haritha, Ali ibn Abi Talib, and Abu Bakr as-Siddiq, may Allah SWT be pleased with them.

So, think about the dream, he's going, it's darkness, he sees the full moon, he follows it, and then he sees in front of the moon Ali, Zayd, and Abu Bakr RA. So he says, so I asked them, “When did you get here? When did you make it to the moon?” So, they said, “Just now.” So, he said that I immediately went to the Prophet SAW, or he said when I woke up, I heard that the Prophet SAW was calling to Islam privately. He said, so I went quickly to the streets of Ajyad, and I found Abu Bakr as-Siddiq RA, and Abu Bakr RA called me to Islam, and so I accepted Islam, and he was amongst the first to accept Islam in that sense. Zayd RA says, and I'm paraphrasing this part, but Zayd RA says that no one embraced Islam before the day I embraced Islam, and no doubt I remained for seven days as one-third of the Muslims. So, he's describing himself as thuruthul Islam. In the sense that he had, some of the ways to look at this is some of the scholars said he was the seventh person to accept Islam, but that he accepted Islam very early on and as we said, you're going to find narrations like the ones of Lubaba RA and Uthman RA and others when we get to Ibn Mas'ud and Abu Dhar and others, may Allah be pleased with them all. And the timing of their embrace of Islam is not as certain as the timing of Khadijah and Ali and Zayd and Abu Bakr. May Allah be pleased with all of the companions of the Prophet SAW. Allahuma ameen. 

So, Saad RA is very early on and based upon some of these narrations, you know, around the same time as Uthman RA, right after Abu Bakr, Ali, and Zayd, and Khadijah and some of those early converts to Islam. So anyway, when Saad accepts Islam, he's only a teenager. This is also something to keep in mind that there is a thread with the 10 promised paradise, that half of them embraced Islam as teenagers, and half of them embraced Islam through Abu Bakr RA. So, he's one of those who embraced Islam through Abu Bakr, and he was a teenager, and he was unmarried, and he lived with his mother. 

So, Saad RA goes, accepts Islam with the Prophet SAW, and then he goes home to tell his mother that he accepted Islam. Now, when he tells his mother that he accepted Islam, his mother goes into an extreme fit of anger and she starts to chastise him and she says, “What is this religion that you have embraced that took you away from the religion of your mother and your father?” And she yells at him, she shows a lot of rage and Saad RA insists that, “This is the religion of Allah SWT, that this is the religion of God, that the Prophet SAW is a messenger of Allah.” And she knows that she cannot argue with him in that sense. Then she goes to the next step, and this gives us another layer of the early entrance into Islam, the people that accepted Islam early. She's not going to torture Saad the way that some of the parents tortured their children. She's not going to beat him or call for someone to physically torture him. What she would do to him is probably worse, which is that she would torture herself to guilt him. 

This is another layer to the early converts of Islam and may Allah SWT reward those who accept Islam and who go through these trials in so many different ways. This is one of the early examples. In fact, the earliest example of a parent who will hurt herself to try to deter her son to leave Islam. So, she's not going to call anyone to torture him. Instead, she says to him, “Listen, either you leave Islam, or I will not eat. I will not drink. I will not shelter myself. I will not comb my hair.” So, she goes and she sits outside and she says, “I'm going to dehydrate myself. I'm going to starve myself. I'm going to let the lice creep into my hair.” And she says that, “If you don't come back, leaving Islam, if you don't come back to your religion, then it's your heart that's going to be broken. You're going to be consumed with regret and remorse, and the people will condemn you forever.” Think about the guilt, and Saad loves his mother. Saad RA loves his mother. Think about the pain that is being caused to him. This is different than having someone whip you and burn you and do some of the things that were done to the other companions. So, Saad RA says, “Oh my mother, don't do it. Oh, my mother, stop.” He pleads with her. When he sees her becoming weak and she's fulfilling her oath, her promises are showing that, you know, she's getting sicker, and Saad RA keeps on coming to her and he keeps on insisting. He keeps bringing food and drink. He keeps trying to cover her. He's trying, “Oh, my mother, don't do this to yourself,”. And she keeps on saying, “Not until you abandon your religion.” And eventually, Saad RA, he comes to a point where he says, “Oh mother, as much as I love you, my love for Allah and the Messenger of Allah is stronger.” And he tells her, he says, “Even if you had a hundred souls and they departed one after the other, then I would not give up my religion. This is not a pursuit. This is not something that's going to yield any type of fruit. You're going to die. I'm going to live with regret, but I'm not going to leave my religion. I can't leave my religion. So, if this is meant to deter me from leaving my religion, it's not going to work. Oh, mother, I believe in this. I love Allah and I love the Messenger SAW.” So eventually, when his mother saw that that type of guilt-tripping him and causing him that emotional pain was not going to work, his mother gave up starving herself and hurting herself. 

And how would Allah SWT reveal the Quran regarding this incident? This is so powerful. Why? Because, you know, she was not doing this for him or she was not doing this to punish him as much as, or out of a hatred for him. You know, there's something about the mother for her child, right? There's something that is natural there, even in the wrongdoing or in the way that she was carrying out her actions in the wrong, trying to promote falsehood or trying to move him away from the religion of Allah SWT. This is a mother who at the end of the day has love for her child and has rights upon her child. 

Did Allah SWT reveal Quran censoring the mother of Saad or talking bad about her or insulting her? No. Instead, the verses that would come down in Surat Al-Ahqaf or Surah Luqman, the ulama talk about the nature of these verses, which are the same. We have enjoined man to treat his parents with excellence. Treat your mother with excellence. And Surat Al-Ahqaf. She already almost died for you when she brought you into this world, right? She carried you in pain, she gave birth to you in pain, she nursed you in pain, she went through all of that for you in pain, right? And Allah SWT in Surah Luqman, which is what most of the scholars say was revealed specifically regarding the incident of Saad RA, was again mentioning the goodness of the mother and the obedience that is owed to the parents. But what does Allah SWT say? That if they command you to worship other than me, don't insult them, don't curse them, don't tell them I don't care. No. Simply do not follow them in that. And on top of that, what does Allah say? Then maintain a blessed company, treat them with absolute kindness in this world. She was commanding him to disbelieve in Allah SWT, Allah was commanding him to show gratitude to her, to show excellence to her, and kind treatment. This is a message, by the way, a lesson for all of us. You know, what is worse in terms of guilt-tripping a person and trying to take your child away from Allah SWT in this way. And still Allah SWT said, to treat her well. To treat both of your parents well, and in this context, Saad RA, to treat her well. So, what excuse do we have, right, when it comes to our parents? How should we be treating our parents? How should we be showing goodness to them? Even in this situation here, where you have a person, you have a woman who is telling her son to literally do kufr. And of course, with the Prophet SAW said, “That there is no obedience to a creation when the creation tells you to disobey the creator”. And so this is something that's very powerful with Saad RA and gives us an early look at a new layer of pain that some of these early Muslims had to endure. Saad RA with his mother. And of course he was not unique to that, right. We find that in the story of Abu Huraira RA and his mother and others as well who were guilted in a very different way by their parents when they embraced Islam. 

So Saad RA insists upon Islam and he would accompany the Prophet SAW and he would bring the skill set that he had of archery with him. He would spend a lifetime at that point in the companionship and protecting the Prophet SAW. And so you find that two firsts that are given to Saad RA is he's the first to fight in the name of Islam in the sense that there was an incident in which some of the Muslims went to pray in one of the valleys. At that point they're not able to pray in front of the Ka'bah of course but they went to pray in one of the valleys which is the habit of the Prophet SAW in the early days was to pray in some secluded spots and some corners and some of the alleyways, places where they would not be easily detected. And Saad RA was with a group of them when they were attacked, and Saad RA was the first to strike one of them and to shed a drop of blood in defending the Prophet SAW in those early days of persecution. The first to throw an arrow in Islam. There's another incident which could be referring to the same one where Saad RA had protected the Prophet SAW by shooting an arrow in his protection when he was ambushed with some of the Muslims early on in Islam. So Saad RA is going to always be the archer in protection of the Prophet SAW and he has a very specific honour in that regard. In Badr, after he makes hijrah alongside the Prophet SAW and he would be amongst those that would witness every battle with the Prophet SAW, he fought alongside the Messenger SAW bravely and he killed more than one person in the capacity of that battle and one of the shuhada of Badr. 

And you don't really hear much about the shuhada of Badr because they were so few, right? In Uhud, you had over 70, and Badr, you had 12, 14, 15 who had passed away in total in the battle of Badr, and Allah knows best, but it's a small number of people. One of them was the little brother of Saad RA who embraced Islam late in Mecca and made hijrah along with Saad RA and his name was Umair ibn Abi Waqqas and he was so young at the battle of Badr, a teenager at the point of the battle of Badr that you know the Prophet SAW did not want to let him accompany the battle or accompany the Muslims in the battle of Badr. And so, he shows up and the Prophet SAW notices him and the Prophet SAW wants to send him home because he's so young and he insists so he keeps on hiding in the ranks and he cries and he begs the Prophet SAW to be alongside them and so the Prophet SAW eventually accepted Umair RA to fight alongside the Muslims in the battle of Badr in which they were greatly outnumbered of course but Allah SWT gave them victory and Umair ibn Abi Waqqas, the brother of Saad RA was one of the very few shuhada' of Badr. One of the very few shuhada' of Badr. And if you go visit Badr and you visit the shuhada', it's very emotional because it's such a different way that that graveyard is and of course the entire site of Badr from Mihjah onwards to Umair ibn Abi Waqqas they are listed and they are very far away from where people typically visit when they go for Hajj or for Umrah. 

In Uhud, Saad RA also enjoys a special distinction. Not only is he one of the few not to flee from the side of the Prophet SAW. But he also continues to fight bravely alongside the Prophet SAW and particularly using the skill of archery. Now of course archery was the advantage that the Muslims would have in their battles and we know that the reason why Uhud turned out the way that it did was because 40 of the archers came down before the Prophet SAW gave them permission to do so and that of course led to them being weak and vulnerable from the other side and so they did not have that advantage anymore with the archers. Saad RA was one of those who was around the Prophet SAW and particularly on the day of Uhud was picking up his arrows and was shooting in every direction precisely. Guarding the Prophet SAW so he was running with the Prophet SAW and he was defending the Prophet SAW with his bow and arrow. While others held swords, Saad RA was shooting one by one with the bow and arrow. 

And think about the scene on the day of Uhud. There were some that were catching arrows with their hands and with their backs like Abu Dujana and Talhah, may Allah be pleased with them guarding the Prophet SAW. And there were some that were trying to defend the Prophet SAW like Nusaybah RA and Yazid ibn Sakin and others, may Allah be pleased with them, with their swords. Think about Saad RA running around the Prophet SAW and shooting these arrows and the companions were picking up arrows to give to him and the Prophet SAW himself was picking up arrows to give them to Saad. Alright, think about the scene. The Prophet SAW and the companions are trying to give him as many arrows as possible because he's so precise, he's so quick, he's so brave in running around the Prophet SAW and trying to defend him in that regard. 

And on that day, the Prophet SAW would say to Saad RA something he would not say to anyone else. He said, “Throw. May my mother and father be sacrificed for you.” This is something that's said to the Prophet SAW. Okay, that the companions would say to the Prophet SAW, “May my mother and father be sacrificed for you, O Messenger of Allah.” But the Prophet SAW said to Saad RA on that day, “Throw your arrows, O Saad. May my mother and father be sacrificed for you.” Ali RA who of course knows the Prophet SAW and grew up with the Prophet SAW and has that close relationship to the Messenger SAW, he said about that saying of the Prophet SAW he said “The Prophet SAW never combined his mother and father in a statement like that except for Saad ibn Abi Waqqas.” When he said to him, “Shoot, O young man. Shoot O Saad. May my mother and father be sacrificed for you.” This is narrated from another companion as well. The Prophet SAW also gave Saad RA another gift when he said to Saad RA, he made dua to Allah SWT to direct his aim and to respond to his duas. To respond to the duas of Saad. Now the Prophet SAW is of course someone whose supplications are answered by Allah SWT. He says to Allah SWT in his dua, “O Allah, respond to Saad when he calls upon you.” And so Saad RA now has this gift in which his duas are answered by Allah SWT, and this is significant going forward in the life of Saad RA because everyone knew that Saad's duas were mustajab. And you don't want someone whose supplications are answered, to make dua against you. So people feared the dua of Saad as we'll see in some incidents that took place later on because of the dua of the Prophet SAW for the dua of Saad. And of course, especially when this is combined with the status of one who is wronged. And so, we'll see later on in the life of Saad RA that someone wrongs him. And this is when he was a governor in Iraq and someone makes a claim against him and it's wronging him. And he makes all of these lies and complaints to Umar al-Khattab RA about him and Saad RA makes dua against that person and that person loses his vision and lives a horrible life. A horrible life in accordance with the way that Saad RA had prayed against him. There's an incident that took place where someone was cursing Ali RA or Ali and Az-Zubayr RA as well in another account. And Saad RA told him he said,” Stop cursing Ali.” and this was in Iraq. And he said to him, you know the man said, “Or what? What are you going to do about it,” He said, “If you don't stop cursing Ali, then I will curse you. I'll make dua against you,”. And you know, this man says that, “Go ahead.” He mocks him. What does that even mean right? These people had lost their appreciation. We talked about the way Uthman RA was treated, what about Saad RA in this regard? So Saad RA he went and he made wudu and he prayed two rak'as and he made dua against the man. 

And they said that a beast came into Iraq and trampled the man like no one we'd ever seen.  So this man's supplication was answered and he, of course it's not like Saad RA would use this for small things. This was in the time of fitnah and the time where people were using language that was not befitting and of course stirring up certain things against the khalifah of the time Ali ibn Abi Talib RA. And Saad RA did not like that. And this was something that the Prophet SAW gave to him and of course he was a righteous man RA. 

We also find in the time of the Prophet SAW that one of the most famous incidents or one of the most famous hadith that we have today that guides our lives as Muslims comes from an incident with Saad RA and that is in the time of the conquest of Mecca. Saad RA fell ill, and he got so sick during the opening of Mecca that he thought he was going to die. and I want you to just think about this incident because Saad RA was younger than the Prophet SAW. Of course he's not that old even at this point right he's still under the age of 40. And he only had one daughter at this point. And he had a lot of wealth. He was one of those that Allah SWT blessed with a lot of money. And he's known for his charity and his generosity. This is one of the various virtues of Saad RA was that he was one who used to give a lot of charity. And so, he's with the Prophet SAW and he feels sick and he feels like he's about to die. And the Prophet SAW visits him and Saad RA says, “Oh messenger of Allah, I have all this money, and I only have one daughter to inherit.” And you know she doesn't need all this money. So Saad RA says, “Ya Rasulullah, can I give away two-thirds of my wealth as charity?” And the Prophet SAW said, “No” He said, “Ya Rasulullah, can I give away half of my wealth as charity?”. And the Prophet SAW says, “No,”. He says, “Well, can I give away one-third of my wealth as charity in my inheritance? Can I will it that way?” The Prophet SAW says, “The third is enough and the third is a lot.”

This is the most that you can give, the maximum that you can give in charity, in your inheritance is one-third of your wealth. And the Prophet SAW said it's better to leave behind your dependents, your heirs, not begging from others. But instead provided for it's better not to leave your family in a way that they have to beg, but instead in a way that they're provided for and he said if you spend anything seeking the pleasure of Allah SWT you'll be rewarded for it even if it's a morsel which you place in your wife's mouth. So Saad RA gives us in that incident, or rather Allah gives us through that incident of Saad RA, thinking that he was going to die, the designation of our inheritance that we should not give more than one-third of our inheritance to charity. Of course, you can give as much as you want before the time of death comes. But not to leave your relatives behind in a desperate situation. Of course, this is something that we have. Saad RA also gained something else, he gained the dua of the Prophet SAW. The Prophet SAW said, “Oh Allah cure Saad.”

And so when Allah SWT or when the Prophet SAW made that dua, Allah SWT indeed cured Saad. And not only would Saad RA live past Fath Mecca, but he would be responsible for the largest swath of the world coming into Islam. And that is, of course, under the Persian Empire, he would be responsible for leading the Muslim army against the Persian Empire, who, of course, showed all sorts of aggression towards the Muslims. And Saad RA would live to spread Islam throughout the Persian Empire. He would live to spread Islam throughout different corners of the world, as we'll talk about. And he would be the last person to die from the ten promised paradise. So the Prophet SAW's dua for Saad RA was answered and Saad RA would live throughout the lives of the Khulafa, into the era of Mu'awiyah, and would pass away at that time RA. 

So let's talk about that for a moment, just end with some of these contributions in that sense and some of these qualities the Prophet SAW said, “Oh Allah, cure Saad, Saad was cured.” May Allah be pleased with him, and he was appointed under Umar ibn al-Khattab RA as the commander of the army. When the battle ensued between the Muslims and the Persian Empire at the time. And of course we know the cruelty, the size, the strength of the Persian Empire under Kisra. This was supposed to be to the Persian Empire. At least they were supposed to easily crush the Muslims. But Allah SWT had other plans, and Saad RA is leading the Muslims through some of the most devastating and harsh battles that would take place. The famous battle of Qadisiyah, or the battle of the elephants, where Saad RA came up with the strategy as the Persians employed elephants against the Muslims. At the time, Saad RA came up with a strategy to strike the elephants with arrows in their eyes, to try to slow them down, to try to make things easier for the Muslims since they were armored up, even the elephants were covered except for their eyes. So, Saad RA took the Muslims through all of these different battles and particularly where the Prophet SAW mentioned that the palace of Kisra who had the largest palace in the world. 

And the Prophet SAW talked about Suraqah ibn Malik RA of course receiving the bracelets of Kisra one day. This was a cruel emperor the man who destroyed Jerusalem, killed 90,000 people in one day the man who had done so much harm to the world. And of course  was an aggressive and arrogant person and it was at the hands of Saad RA that he would find his defeat. And one of the incidents that I think about in this regard, just from the journey of its starting that the last episode of this battle in which Saad RA actually is able to conquer the palace of Madyan, the palace of Kisra. This is an episode that when he's encroaching upon this area in Iraq, where you see two people whose lives started off in a very similar way, even though they were in different corners of the world. And that is Saad and Salman al-Farisi, may Allah be pleased with them. Salman is sitting behind Saad RA. And how did Salman get to that point? His father oppressed him for leaving their religion and for embracing at that time, at least you know monotheistic form of Christianity and an early form of Christianity, which would eventually lead him to Islam. And Salman RA would be chained up and tortured in Persia by his own father, and would have to endure the pain of leaving those chains, escaping the chains of his father. Saad RA having to endure the pain of his mother, insisting upon him leaving Islam and enduring pain herself, which actually caused him great pain. And they are together as they enter upon this palace, the very famous palace of Kisra. And this is how Allah SWT gifts them and Allah opens the doors for them, and they spread Islam to that time, the largest empire in the world.

So Saad RA was someone who lived to see the spread of Islam through Persia, who in fact was the architect of that spread of Islam, through Persia, the general who did so. He was also one of those who was appointed by Umar RA at the time of Umar RA being assassinated, he was appointed to the shura, to the council that would choose the next khalifah. And what you see with Saad RA is that he was someone who wanted no part of the glory or the leadership or the struggles or the strife that would take place afterwards. Saad RA was not someone who wanted to be in charge, he was not someone that wanted glory and he certainly did not want to be a part of the fight that would take place later on, the various fights and the battles that would take place in the fitnah. He didn't want anything to do with any of that, he could have very well become a khalifah himself. Because he was clearly amongst that small select group of people who were qualified to do so, because the shura was to appoint a khalifah amongst themselves. Saad RA wanted nothing to do with that.Hhe wanted to engage himself still, in spreading this beautiful religion. And what you find from him is this insistence on being productive. And this insistence on not getting involved in the fitnah, no matter what happens. This is Saad RA's position and he narrated many of the hadith in that regard. He narrated the hadith that to curse, to fight a muslim is kufr and to defame him is a form of evil doing, is a form of obscenity. So he avoided the fighting of the muslims, he avoided the defaming of the muslims he wanted nothing to do with that. He is the one who narrates the hadith where the prophet SAW said that when fitnah comes that there would be such a hard time of dissension that to sit in that time is better than to stand. To stand in that time is better than to walk. And to walk in that time is better than running. Meaning that the less you do in terms of getting involved when you see fitnah break out, when you see dissension break out, the better. And there are so many different parts of hadith where he or different hadith that he narrated in that regard. And he lived that out RA where, when he was called to fights that were internal, he wanted nothing to do with it. And that's where you find  that some of the early historical accounts of Saad RA being the one to spread Islam to China. And you find some of the masjid of Saad RA that is still there. And some of the early imprints of the da'wah that Saad RA did even in going to China. And so there's a great lesson here that Saad RA said, “I did not sign up for this.” Go through all of this pain shoot arrows on behalf of the prophet SAW, go through the emotional torture of having my mother do with me what she did when i embraced Islam, to fight my own and to use these to get involved in disunity and to get involved in the horrors of what was showing itself in the fitnah at the time. He wanted nothing to do with it. Even though he could have asserted himself, in a way that he would have certainly had a great share of power and a great share of leadership and people would have yielded to him because of who he was. His position was well known but Saad RA is someone who wants to spend his time in the da'wah, spend his time doing good, spend his time spreading Islam, not spend his time fighting the Muslims from within. He knows that there's no benefit in that whatsoever. And the prophet SAW had warned him of that as well and there's something that you're finding by the way as a common theme that so many of these sahaba that would live to see these unfortunate times of disunity and dissension and the induced fitnah from the outside that led to all sorts of turmoil on the inside and confusion on the inside. They had messages from the prophet SAW that deeply impacted them as to how they would carry themselves when those things would take place. and there's one narration that I'll share here, that you know one of his children, which by the way, when I say one of his children, remember how in Fath Mecca, he only had one daughter? By the time he died RA, he had over 20 children. So he lived long and he had many children and one of his children came to him. And Saad RA was literally shepherding sheep in the mountains away from the people. Just like the prophet SAW said that there would come a time of fitnah where it's better to just literally take your sheep, avoid everybody and just, you know the greatest thing that you could do is just have your little share of wealth, take care of yourself, take care of your family and avoid it all. And so that's what Saad RA, this man of prominence is doing. And one of his children wanted him to take a more active role because he wanted a share of that power. And so, one of his sons comes to him and Saad RA is outside tending to his sheep tending to his crops. And when he sees his son coming to him, imagine he says, “I seek refuge in Allah from the evil of what he's coming to bring me.” I have a bad feeling about him and what he's bringing to me right now. And so what does the son do? He comes to him and he tells him he says, ”Look, you know all this is happening and you are who you are. And if you went out there, you could assert yourself and you could have power and you could have all sorts of glory and you could claim your rightful position.” And Saad RA, he refuses it all and he says the beautiful hadith which he narrates he says, “Rather Allah loves his servant who is pious, he leaves off sins. Who is independent of the people, so he leaves off asking from the people or needing the people anything. And who is obscure, who's not seen by the people.” So he says and that's how he wanted to live his life, the end of his life. Obscure, self-sufficient, and fearing Allah SWT. Not indulging the people's sins nor indulging their praise, nor indulging their wealth. I want nothing to do with any of it. I'm going to take care of what Allah SWT has given to me and be productive in ways that I know are productive and leave off all this fitnah. And there's something for all of us in that regard to really take into consideration, as turmoil envelops us in so many different ways. May Allah SWT protect us and allow us to have these beautiful qualities that Saad RA narrates from the Prophet SAW. And so Saad RA would abide by that and he would pass away RA indeed a servant who is pious, independent, and obscure. While he was obscured from the people and self-sufficient and fearing Allah SWT certainly claims his rightful place in history. And just to be from those that the Prophet SAW promised Jannah and from those who early on came to the Prophet SAW and would offer everything and gives us an example of one who would be hurt by his own mother in that regard for embracing Islam. And how Allah taught us to treat our parents even in that regard. May Allah SWT be pleased with Saad RA and allow us to learn from his example. may Allah SWT gather us with him and with the blessed companions and the family of the Prophet SAW and the Prophet SAW in Jannatul Firdaus. 

Allahumma ameen. JazakumAllahu khayran. Wasalamualikoum wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh.
