So alhamdulillah, we have covered now Az-Zubayr, and we now come to the other neighbour of the Prophet SAW in Jannah. And that is Talhah ibn Ubaidillah. And we'll talk a little bit about the reasoning of Talhah and Az-Zubayr being the neighbours of the Prophet SAW. But insha Allah ta'ala try to give Talhah his due right in his own individual way. 

Talhah ibn Ubaidillah, his full name is Talhah ibn Ubaidillah ibn Uthman ibn Amr al-Qurashi al-Taymi. He was born into a wealthy tribe, and that tribe is known as Banu Taym. And I'll talk a little bit about that tribe as well. 

He was a cloth merchant, a successful trader. He is physically described in the following way. He was tall, he was dark, he had plenty of hair, he was handsome, he was youthful, and he used to walk at a very fast pace. He used to wear expensive clothes and scents, and they said that he had a gold ring prior to it being forbidden. He had a gold ring that had an exquisite ruby in it. So, you can imagine Talhah as a young, successful man who frequently goes on the trade routes to Ash-Sham and to Yemen and who has everything that you could possibly want in this world. The protection of the tribe, the love of his people. He's still a young man. He's only about 18 years old when the Prophet SAW receives revelation, and he has everything to lose by becoming a Muslim. 

Let's talk a little bit about his tribe because there is a notable feature of this tribe of Banu Taym. First and foremost, it's the tribe of Abu Bakr as-Siddiq. So he is a direct relative of Abu Bakr by birth. He's the second cousin of Abu Bakr and the son-in-law of Abu Bakr as-Siddiq. So, he's from the same tribe as Abu Bakr. He's a second cousin. He's married to his daughter, Umm Kulthum bint Abu Bakr. May Allah SWT be pleased with the family of Abu Bakr. 

So, you already have the most distinct person after the Prophet SAW from his tribe and closely related to him. From this tribe was also a man by the name of Abdullah ibn Jud'an. And we've spoken about Abdullah ibn Jud'an a few times. He's a man who was noted before Islam for his generosity as well. So, generosity is the feature of Banu Taym. And Talhah follows in that same mould of being a man who is extremely generous with the people and who is loved for his generosity. So when you have the three most prominent people as Abu Bakr, Abdullah ibn Jud'an, and Talhah, what do you expect from Banu Taym? 

His mother, her name was As-Sa'ba bint Abdullah, and she was from the Hadhram tribe. And her brother, meaning the maternal uncle of Talhah, was a companion who is not often spoken about, but he is a Sahabi by the name of Al-Alaa ibn al-Hadhrami. One of the things about Talhah as well is that he was married to several women of high lineage. And so, he was not just from a powerful and notable tribe of Banu Taym, but he's also linked to various tribes because he would marry women of the highest ranking from the highest tribe. So, he is connected to multiple tribes in Mecca from a very young age. Well respected, he has lineage, he has wealth, he has good character.

And when Islam comes, Talhah was actually not even in Mecca. He was actually on his trade route to Ash-Sham. And when he was in Ash-Sham, which is greater Syria, he comes across a monk that was worshipping Allah SWT, one of the people of the book, a Christian monk. And the monk asks him, he says, “Is anyone of you from your group from the people of the sanctuary, the people of Mecca?” And Talhah RA said, “I just came from Mecca”. So, the monk says, “Has Ahmad yet appeared?” Now this is all completely unfamiliar to Talhah. He does not even know that Ahmad refers to Muhammad SAW. And that was the name by which he was prophesized. And of course, Ahmad comes from the same root. And he is the one who is even more praised, the most praised Ahmad SAW. So, Talhah says, I answered the monk, and I said, “Who is Ahmad?” He says, “He is the son of Abdullah, the seal of the prophets. He comes from the land of the Haram, the land of the sanctuary. And then he migrates to a place of palm trees, black soil and many springs”. Talhah is listening to him talk about Muhammad SAW. And the monk tells him, “You should hurry up and meet him quickly. If he has come out, you should hurry up and you should embrace him and meet him quickly.” Talhah said, I just had a feeling that there was something deep to what he was saying. It landed in my heart.

So as soon as I got back to Mecca from my trade route, I asked the people, I said, “Has something happened recently?” So, they said, “Muhammad, the son of Abdullah SAW, has claimed prophethood. And he was followed by Ibn Abi Quhafa, Abu Bakr as-Siddiq”. Because Talhah is so close to Abu Bakr as-Siddiq, not as much to the Prophet SAW, he goes to Abu Bakr first. So, Talhah knew of the Prophet SAW, he knew the Prophet SAW, he knew his character, and he had no reason to doubt his character, but Abu Bakr is his relative. So, he goes to Abu Bakr as-Siddiq, and he says to Abu Bakr, “Did you follow this man, O Abu Bakr?”. And he said, “Yes, and you should too. You should follow him as well, because he calls to the truth, and he calls to that which is good”. So Talhah goes with Abu Bakr, he meets the Prophet SAW, he hears the message of Islam once again affirmed from the mouth of the Messenger SAW himself, the message of the oneness of God, and Talhah accepts Islam alongside Abu Bakr as-Siddiq, and he is considered the eighth person potentially, again all of these numbers if you haven't figured out by now, can be somewhat approximate, but he's considered the eighth person or one of the first eight to accept Islam only at the age of 18 years old. So, like Az-Zubayr, like so many of these early Muslims, he was a young man, a smart man, a strong man, a promising man, and one of those who would be promised paradise by the Prophet SAW. So, Talhah of course is famously one of the ten that were promised paradise by the Prophet SAW, and one of the six of the ten that Abu Bakr RA accounts for. Okay, so Abu Bakr of course is the guide to Talhah in this sense, and so everything that Talhah would do is to the credit of Abu Bakr as-Siddiq as well for bringing him to Islam. 

So, what happens when Talhah becomes Muslim? As we've said, those who were powerful or those who were elite in society tended to be punished behind closed doors or not as openly and publicly as the weak ones in Mecca. Okay, the poors in Mecca, the Ammars of the world, the Sumayyas of the world, the Khabbabs of the world, the Bilals of the world. So those that were powerful were punished last and least, for the most part, and behind closed doors. So because Talhah was so prominent in his reputation and he's from Banu Taym, he's still going to undergo punishment at the hands of his own tribe. And the person that would be in charge of punishing him was none other than Naufal ibn Khuwaylid. Okay, now remember Talhah and Az-Zubayr are extremely close friends. And so, this all sort of comes back together because Naufal plays a role in the punishment of Az-Zubayr. Naufal, who is the brother of Khadijah, whom the Prophet SAW called the devil of Quraysh. He took Talhah and he took Abu Bakr as-Siddiq. And I know it's been a while since we've covered Abu Bakr, but you might remember that Abu Bakr and Talhah were tortured together. Literally, Naufal ibn Khuwaylid tied Abu Bakr and Talhah up with one rope, and he violently tortured them.

And he also brought others to violently beat them while they were tied together by their hands and by their feet. And so that's why Naufal, when he did that, Abu Bakr and Talhah were nicknamed Al-Qarinayn, the two Qarins, the two close companions, the two tied ones. Literally they were tied together. And so, he used to tie them up. He used to whip them. The people used to come and poke them with their swords. They used to be deprived of food and water for a very long time. And of course, most of this was done behind closed doors, but some of this was public as well. 

Mas'ud ibn Kharash, he actually says, “I remember making sa'i between As-Safa and Al-Marwa, and I saw a crowd of people who were pushing a young man whose hands were tied behind his back. And as they rushed behind him, they started to rain down punches on his head. And in the crowd was an old woman who was lashing him with a whip as well, and she was shouting the worst of things towards him.” So, I said, “What is the matter with this young man?” And they said, “This is Talhah ibn Ubaidillah. He gave up his religion and he now follows the man from Banu Hashim.” So, you can see the tribalism even in how they're describing the way that Talhah embraced the message of the Prophet SAW. And so Mas'ud said, “And I said, “Who is the woman behind him?” And they responded and they said, “This is his mother As-Sa'aba bint Al-Hadhrami. And she was the one who was whipping Talhah and shouting all sorts of abuses towards him.” So, he shares a lot of similarity then in that sense from Az-Zubayr. Of course, Az-Zubayr grew up an orphan and did not have the luxuries and the privileges that Talhah had. But of course, he was initially tortured and punished by his mother As-Safiyyah bint Abdul Muttalib.

So, he encountered his fair share of abuse, especially at the beginning of his embracing Islam and becoming Muslim. However, for the most part, Talhah was able to escape the punishments the persecutions in Mecca for a few reasons. Number one was because of his status and his wealth. And generally, those people of status and wealth did not suffer as much in the early days of Mecca in particular. The second thing is that he was barely in Mecca even after Islam due to his trade routes. Remember, this is a man who's a merchant. This is a man who goes between Yemen and Ash-Sham trading with the people, encountering different empires, and who does not spend much time in Mecca. And when he comes back to Mecca, it's his home base, and then he goes out once again to trade, to buy and to sell. And this was the case with Talhah even after Islam. And so he was not amongst those that made the migration to Abyssinia, even though Az-Zubayr, who is such a close friend of his, his best friend, to the point that their stories are like one story. Az-Zubayr of course played a prominent role in Abyssinia, while Talhah continued to stay out of Mecca for the most part, buying and selling. And the people of Mecca dealt with him begrudgingly just because of the amount of goods that he would bring back from his trade routes and the prominence that he had in that sense, in the place of commerce. 

Now, when the Prophet SAW decides to make the Hijrah, Talhah actually met the Prophet SAW and Abu Bakr, who was his father-in-law, on the way out of Mecca, and he was coming back from Ash-Sham. So he actually brought clothes with him from Ash-Sham that he gave to the Prophet SAW and Abu Bakr. After they had already left Mecca, he also informed them of some of the ways in which Medina was awaiting the Prophet SAW and what he was hearing outside of Mecca about the escape of the Prophet SAW from the persecution of Mecca. So he goes to Abu Bakr and the Prophet SAW, he gives them what he gives them, and then he makes his way to Mecca, and Talhah is actually the person that would accompany the family of Abu Bakr to Medina on the Hijrah. And of course, that's at the very end, when Abu Bakr had already left with the Prophet SAW, Talhah brings the family of Abu Bakr as-Siddiq forward, and then joins the Prophet SAW and the companions in Al-Medina. When he arrives in Medina, the Prophet SAW of course did mu'akha, he paired off people as brothers. He paired off Talhah with none other than Abu Ayyub al-Ansari. So, Abu Ayyub is considered the brother of Talhah ibn Ubaidillah. 

Now his story with the battle of Badr is particularly interesting because he missed it. Okay, and he didn't miss it because he was out trading. He missed it because the Prophet SAW sent him and Sa'eed ibn Zayd, of course another one of the Ten Promised Paradise, on a mission to spy on one of the caravans of Abu Sufyan. And of course, at this point, Abu Sufyan and the people of Mecca had stolen much of the goods that were left behind in Mecca, and they were buying and trading in Ash-Sham and the Prophet SAW was trying to find a way to intercept some of those caravans. So, while they were out looking for this particular caravan of Abu Sufyan in a place called Hawra, they heard about the battle of Badr that had already taken place while they were on their way back. So these two, Talhah and Sa'eed ibn Zayd are on their way to help the Prophet SAW to carry out this particular order from the Prophet SAW, but in the process, they missed being alongside the Prophet SAW in the battle of Badr, and that pained Talhah RA. And when Allah SWT talks about a people that are truthful to the covenant, to the promise they make with Allah SWT, some of them are given an opportunity to fulfil their promise right away. Some of them are delayed in fulfilling that promise, but they do not switch in regard to their resolve. They maintain their intention; they maintain their determination to serve in the best way possible. So Talhah is one of those people who missed Badr, and who longed for the moment to fight alongside the Prophet SAW, and defend him against his enemies. And so, when he comes to the Prophet SAW, and he complains to the Prophet SAW, “Ya Rasulullah, I missed Badr. I missed the battle.” What does the Prophet SAW say to him? He says, “Look, you have your portion. It's not like you missed Badr because of something else. You missed Badr because you were out doing what I asked you to do, what I commanded you to do. So, you have your portion of the spoils”. He says, “What about my reward? I don't care about the worldly stuff. I don't care if I have the spoils.” The Prophet SAW, he says, “And you have the reward of Badr.” So like Uthman, who of course missed Badr because he was tending to the daughter of the Prophet SAW, his wife Ruqayya, and the Prophet SAW counted him from the veterans of Badr, which was a lofty reward. Talhah and Sa'eed ibn Zayd are also counted from the veterans of Badr, even though they were not physically present at the Battle of Badr, which shows you, of course, the role of the sincerity of intention. If a person was sincere, then they would have the full reward. So, because they had the full intention to go out and to protect the Prophet SAW, to serve, they still got the full reward, even though they were out at the time, and they were not amongst those that would fight physically in Badr. 

However, when Uhud was mentioned, and this is hard for me to talk about here because I'm used to talking about it at Uhud, standing there in Uhud and with the groups for Umrah and Hajj, explaining the scene of Uhud. When Uhud was mentioned in the presence of Abu Bakr as-Siddiq, Abu Bakr would say, “That was the day of Talhah”. Uhud is considered the day of Talhah. This is a narration of Ibn Hibban. Abu Bakr says the whole day is considered the day of Talhah. Uhud, of course, is a day that we know of great grief. We know of what happened to the Prophet SAW. There are multiple lessons, and that's why when the groups go there for Umrah and Hajj, there is sufficient time to reflect on what happened, what transpired in Uhud, because of the amount of lessons that we can take from it. Of course, it's sunnah to visit the martyrs of Uhud themselves. Talhah is not buried in Uhud. He's not there with Hamza and Mus'ab and the others that are there. But Abu Bakr used to say, “That was the day of Talhah.” Why?

Because the way that Talhah served alongside the Prophet SAW in Uhud was even stunning to the eyes of the Prophet SAW. And there are so many hadith witnessing the heroic courage that Talhah displayed on that day, never leaving the side of the Prophet SAW. Jabir says, “Every time the Prophet SAW would say, “Who is for the people?” Talhah would say, “Me, O Rasulullah.” Just like Az-Zubayr, every time the Prophet SAW called out, Talhah would be there. Talhah answered. So, the same way as Zubayr, the disciple of the Prophet SAW answered, Talhah would go where the Prophet SAW directed him without any type of hesitation. And the Prophet SAW says, “I saw myself on the day of Uhud, and there was no one that was close to me except for Jibreel AS on my right, and Talhah on my left.” I mean, that tells you everything about how Talhah was sticking by the side of the Prophet SAW. And you then see the different narrations, and they're throughout al-Bukhari, they're throughout Muslim, Ahmad and the books of seerah, that when the arrows were coming towards the messenger of Allah SAW, Talhah was using his body and even his hands to catch the arrows that were coming towards the Prophet SAW. So, just imagine the sight of the Prophet SAW being attacked and Talhah fighting from every side of him SAW, and catching the arrows with one hand, using his sword with the other hand, and suffering wound after wound.

And when they lifted the Prophet SAW, of course, the Prophet SAW fell in Uhud, his face was stomped, his teeth were knocked out. They thought the Prophet SAW had died. Talhah, he bent down, he carried the Prophet SAW on his back, and he went up the mountain, and he put down the Prophet SAW. And Abu Bakr, he says at that moment, “Abu Ubaidah ibn al-Jarrah and I, we were far away from the Prophet SAW because we were fighting off some of those that were coming forward. And when we got close to the Prophet SAW, the Prophet SAW said, “Leave me and go towards your companion.” And what he meant by your companion, he meant Talhah. And Abu Bakr says, “We got to Talhah, and his wounds were all over his body. He was bleeding from every part of his body. One wound from a sword, one wound from a spear, one wound from an arrow, his foot had been cut, and he literally laid unconscious, and the blood was flowing from his mouth. Somehow, he was still alive.” All of that, he took spears and swords and arrows defending the Prophet SAW and all that, somehow, he was alive. And the Prophet SAW, breathing hard, himself almost having died, SAW, he looks at Talhah, and what does he say? He says, “It became mandatory today for Talhah.” What became mandatory for Talhah? Talhah fulfilled his obligation, and Jannah became obligated for Talhah, and the Prophet SAW said, “Whoever wants to see a walking martyr, a shaheed who still lives, a shaheed who somehow survived, but is still walking on his feet, let him look at Talhah.” So, even though Talhah survived that day, the Prophet SAW counted him amongst the shuhada of that day because of the amount of sacrifice that he put forward. And how amazing of a testimony. You don't find this type of testimony from the Prophet SAW for anyone like he said about Talhah that day. And that's why Talhah from that day forward was called the living martyr, he was a walking shaheed. 

Umm Ishaq bint Talhah, the daughter of Talhah, she says that “My father had 24 wounds on his body from that day that never even fully healed”. So Uhud was a day that Talhah was struck right and left, and his hand was partially paralyzed because of the arrows that he caught on the day of Uhud. Even with that, he still fought every single battle with the Prophet SAW. So Uhud onwards, despite the wounds that he suffered, despite not being able to even fully function with his right hand anymore, he still fought alongside the Prophet SAW with every single battle. Now, does it make sense when we say, that the Prophet SAW said, “Talhah and Zubayr are my two neighbours in Jannah.” Az-Zubayr, the first one to rush to the Prophet SAW in Mecca, because he heard that the Prophet SAW was attacked, that young man that said, “I'm going to defend you, Oh Rasulullah.” And Talhah, who rushed to the side of the Prophet SAW on the day where he almost died and had the side, the back, the front of the Prophet SAW throughout and almost died in the process. That's why when we enter Jannatul Firdaus, may Allah grant it to each one of us, Allahumma ameen, and we go to visit our beloved one, SAW, we'll find his two neighbours to be, Talhah and Zubayr, may Allah SWT allow us to have that blessed companionship. Allahumma ameen. 

So, what are some of the qualities of Talhah? We're just getting started. If you just talked about Uhud alone, and Abu Bakr RA is saying, that's the day of Talhah, and the Prophet SAW saying, “Whoever wants to see a living martyr, this is who you look at”. That would be sufficient, but there is more. 

Number one, obviously his courage. Talhah was a man of extreme courage. Number two, he was proficient in his trade, extremely wealthy. Some of them say his wealth rivalled Uthman ibn Affan. He profited from every single business deal. He would earn at least a thousand gold coins a day, and he would give the majority of it in charity. He was known for his asceticism. So as rich as he was, he worried about his wealth, and he worried about whether it would affect his standing with Allah SWT. So, his money never reached his heart. It stayed in his hand. Because of his generosity, and because of his goodness, the Prophet SAW gave him three nicknames beyond “the living shaheed”. The Prophet SAW called him Talhah the good one, Talhah the generous one, and Talhah who is the beneficent one. So, he receives three nicknames from the Prophet SAW. And Talhah, by the way, is a tree that has multiple branches. And so he is a tree that has these multiple branches that bear fruit in so many different ways in regard to his generosity. And on the Battle of Tabuk, we know about Uthman RA coming forth on that day. Talhah RA wanted to compete with Uthman RA.

So on that day, he put forth up to 700,000 dirhams for the sake of Allah SWT answering the call of the Prophet SAW following the footsteps of Uthman. Sa'eed ibn Zayd, who was of course his companion in spying on that caravan of Abu Sufyan and in so much more. He said, I used to accompany Talhah on journeys. And I used to stay with him in his home. And he said, I have never seen a man who was more generous with his money, with his clothes and with his food than Talhah. So, known for his generosity, known for the way that he would treat his guests, known for being a good companion on a journey, known for not really having an attachment to this wealth, though he had everything that you could want of his clothes and of his sense and of everything that he would attain on his trade routes. He also was known for forgiving debts as well. Remember, this is one of the things that the Prophet SAW mentioned causes one to be shaded up by the throne of Allah SWT on the day of judgment, to forgive debts. And so if someone came to him and had a hardship and wasn't able to pay back a loan in time, Talhah would forgive debts. He forgave debts up to even 30,000 dirhams in one narration. So anyone that came to him, Talhah was quick to forgive all of those debts. He's also considered amongst the group that are known as those who are pleasing to the Prophet SAW. Who are those that are pleasing to the Prophet SAW? They are those that the Prophet SAW said in a single narration that I am pleased with so-and-so, I am pleased with so-and-so. So, he mentioned Umar and Uthman and Ali and Zubayr and Talhah and Sa'ad and Abdurrahman ibn Auf and so on and so forth. So, they used to say to those that the Prophet SAW mentioned that he was pleased with them. 

Of course Abu Bakr As-Siddiq , they used to say that the Prophet SAW passed away and he was pleased with you. Like you should be pleased knowing that the Prophet SAW died while he was pleased with you. After the Prophet SAW passed away, we find that Talhah was one of the key warriors of Abu Bakr Al-Siddiq RA in the battle against Musaylimah Al-Kazzab. The conquests of Umar, he fought into the armies of Ash-Sham. So just like he used to go to Ash-Sham buying and selling, he was amongst those who was very familiar with the territory of Ash-Sham and who fought under Umar Al-Khattab. And of course, when Umar was passing away, as we know, he appointed to his shura all of those that were from the Ten Promised Paradise, with the exception of Sa'eed ibn Zayd because Sa'eed ibn Zayd was his brother-in-law. So Talhah is one of the six that was appointed to the council of Umar ibn Khattab to choose the next khalifah. Talhah immediately had no interest whatsoever in the khilafah himself, but he gave his vote to Abdurrahman ibn Auf. So, trusting that Abdurrahman ibn Auf would make the best decision to choose the khalifah, Talhah immediately submitted his vote that he was not interested in it himself. And he felt like Abdurrahman ibn Auf would be the best person to choose amongst the remaining group, which of course would lead to the election, the appointment of Uthman ibn Affan to be the next khalifah, and then after him, Ali ibn Abi Talib. 

Now, when we get to the life of Uthman particularly, and I'm not going to go too deep into the trials and tribulations as I have not done because the focus of this series has been the first, meaning the beginning and how they came to Islam and their contributions and speaking to their qualities, but just getting to the end of this. But in the near future, we will be exploring some of those themes, some of the lessons that we can glean from those themes. 

But Talhah placed his son, Muhammad, at the door of Uthman when he was under siege. However, Talhah did not expect that things would get as dramatic as they did and that people would actually have the nerve to murder Uthman. So Talhah did not stay in Medina at the time. He had left. He did not think it was going to reach that point of severity. So even though he loved Uthman, and yes, he actually had his own disagreements with some of the policies of Uthman. Some of the sahaba would naturally disagree, but never amongst the fitnah. And again, appointed his son, Muhammad, to be amongst those who would defend Uthman. Talhah was not present when Uthman was assassinated. And when Uthman was assassinated, he felt a tremendous amount of guilt for not being there to support him and to protect him when he was under siege. So he gave his bay'ah to Ali, but he was frustrated that the murderers of Uthman, like, of course, some of the sahaba were, that they wanted the murderers of Uthman to be pursued right away. And they wanted justice for Uthman ibn Affan. 

And he also had this unique burden of guilt that he was not there with Uthman at the time of his assassination. And he says a very powerful line. And, I've said this in other places, that this line of Talhah has so much depth to it. If we think about it in the sense of sacrifice and selflessness, he said, “Oh Allah, take from me for Uthman until you are pleased.” Meaning, let me suffer, let me be killed, let me be hurt, let me go through all sorts of pain. For Uthman, until you are pleased. Of course, it's all for the sake of Allah SWT. What he means by that is the cause of Uthman, the cause of justice for Uthman. And remember, Uthman is the one whom the sahaba readily gave Bay'at Al-Ridwan. They gave the bay'ah, they gave the pledge to go to Mecca and to die in Hudaybiyyah when they thought that Uthman had been killed. And the Prophet SAW took his two hands and clasped them and said, This is for Uthman. This is me, and this is on Uthman. This is the cause of Uthman. So, Talhah was, who felt so guilty for not being there at the time that Uthman was assassinated and not fighting on his behalf. And he's a selfless man. More selfless of course, for the Prophet SAW than anyone else, as he did in Uhud. He says, “Oh Allah, take from me for Uthman until you are pleased”. So he was among those that was with Aisha and Zubayr to go to Ali in Kufa. They came from Mecca at that point to go to Ali in Iraq to demand justice for Uthman. I've already sort of recounted this when we talk through the life of Ali and Zubayr. But briefly, of course, they met in Kufa. Aisha, Talhah, and Zubayr on one side and Ali primarily leading on the other side. And they demanded that the murderers of Uthman would be pursued. 

Ali said, I have every intention to pursue the murderers of Uthman. But he wanted to solidify the situation before he went after so that he did not perpetuate further chaos. So, the frustrations were understandable. The love of Uthman was fully understandable. Ali wanted justice for Uthman. But Ali wanted to solidify the situation first. As we said about Zubayr, when Ali reminded him about the time they were together, Zubayr actually just left there. As for Aisha and Talhah and Ali, they came to an agreement that they would pursue the killers of Uthman together under unified leadership. And that night, the same people who caused the massive fitnah in Medina in the first place, knowing that the two armies or the two groups were going to come together, what did they do at night? They attacked both camps so that both camps thought that the other was attacking them. So, Ali thought that the other camp was attacking. Aisha and Talhah thought that this camp was attacking. And you have the tragedy, truly the tragedy of the Battle of Al-Jamal. And Talhah was amongst those that died in the Battle of Al-Jamal. So, he was killed in that battle. And one of the most heartbreaking scenes, probably to encapsulate the fitnah, how tragic this was, was Ali going to the body of Talhah in battle. 

When Ali finds the body of Talhah in battle, and he knows the position of Talhah, he kneeled and he put the head of Talhah in his lap, and he started to wipe the dirt off of his face. And he said, “You are too noble and too beloved to me, O Abu Muhammad, for me to see you in this state.” And Ali, he started to cry. And he said, “Oh, to Allah I complain about my hardships, about my pain, about how I feel in this situation”. And Ali said, “I wish I would have died 20 years before this day. I wish I had never saw this day that Talhah is dead in such a fashion. This noble man is dead in such a fashion, and I'm holding him in this way.” And so, Ali wept, and the companions around Ali wept. Ali washed him, and he prayed upon him. And after he led the janazah of Talhah, he called the people forward. And this is one of the lessons that you would take from this. He called the people forward, and he had the son of Talhah, Muhammad ibn Talhah, sit next to him on the chair of the khalifah. So, the leader is there. He calls all of the people forward after leading the janazah of Talhah. And he tells “Muhammad, sit next to me.” And he says, “There are some people that claim that only the foolish ones came out to fight.” He said, “But this is the most honoured of faces that came out on the earth.” And he said, “I heard the Prophet SAW say, ‘Talhah biz-Zubayr jaraya fil-jannan”. Of course, Talhah and Zubayr the neighbours of the Prophet SAW were killed on that day. One of them, Zubayr, was pursued and murdered in salah, in that very nasty way.

Talhah was killed in the battle. And so, he looked towards Muhammad, the son of Talhah. And he said, “I ask Allah to make your father and me amongst those who are mentioned in the ayah, And we have removed from their chest, from their hearts, all grudges and put them as brothers upon these thrones facing one another.” So, you can imagine the scene in this situation, right? And the pain that Ali felt and that the sahaba felt, because this was the first time that you had blood drawn in a war that included sahaba on both sides of that battle, even if it was provoked and instigated by people of fitnah. Fitnah is always instigated by people of fitnah. But in this situation, the unfortunate consequence of this that you have the sahaba on both sides of this battle. So, Talhah was killed that day. And he had 74 wounds on his body. They say up to 74 wounds that he suffered fi sabilillah, on the cause of Allah SWT, through all the battles alongside the Prophet SAW. And under the khulafa ar-rashideen, under Abu Bakr and then Umar and Uthman. And of course, in this situation, being prayed upon, washed and prayed upon by Ali. 

There's an interesting dream about Talhah after his death. That a man has seen Talhah after his death. And he said, “Move me or move my grave from the place that you buried me. And the water has harmed me, or the water has bothered me.” And so, they saw the man saw him three times. So, he told Ibn Abbas about what he saw of Talhah. So, they went to the grave of Talhah, and they saw that, it was that there was a particular stream of water that was filling that land with water. So, they transferred the grave of Talhah. And they said that his body was completely intact. And the smell of the kafur, the smell of the scent of his body, the good smell was coming out of his body in the most beautiful of ways when they re-buried him and moved his grave away from that place that was becoming soaked by that stream. After his death, Sa'id ibn Musayyib, he narrates that there was a man that was cursing Ali and Talhah and Az-Zubayr. So Sa’id of course who he said is answered in his prayers. He prayed against that man when the man refused to stop. And Allah SWT caused the prayer of Sa'id to come upon that man who was cursing Ali and Talhah and Az-Zubayr. May Allah SWT be pleased with them all. Allahumma ameen. 

Now, a few interesting things about the family of Talhah. Talhah was married to four sisters-in-law of the Prophet SAW. So, when we talk about the way that he was married to different tribes and the lineage and the connection that he had beyond being just the son-in-law of Abu Bakr as-Siddiq. He has a unique distinction of being married to four of the sisters-in-law of the Prophet SAW. So, he was married to Umm Kulthum bint Abu Bakr. He was married to Ruqayya bint Abu Umayya. He was married to Hamna bint Jahsh. And he was married to Al-Fari'ah bint Abu Sufyan.

So, these are Al-Fari'ah bint Abu Sufyan of course being the sister of Umm Habibah. Ruqayya bint Abu Umayya is the sister of Umm Salama. Umm Kulthum of course being the sister of Aisha. And Hamna being the sister of Zainab bint Jahsh. May Allah SWT be pleased with them all. So, he's married to four of the sisters-in-law of the Prophet SAW. So that's quite a connection that you find there. 

Lastly, and I think this is extremely beautiful, the names that he chose for his kids. If you remember, we said Zubayr would name his children after martyrs. Talhah would name his children after prophets. So who are the children of Talhah? Listen to this and think about this especially as you're thinking about naming your children. His children's names are Muhammad, Imran, Musa, Yaqub, Ismail, Ishaq, Zakariya, Yahya, Yusuf, and Isa. So, he named his sons all after the prophets of Allah SWT. So, Muhammad of course being his oldest after Muhammad SAW, Imran, Musa, Yaqub, Ismail, Ishaq, Zakariya, Yahya, Yusuf, and Isa. May Allah SWT send his peace and blessings upon them all. His daughter however is one of the great legacies that he leaves behind. Her name is Aisha bint Talhah, and she becomes known as one of the greatest scholars of hadith and fiqh in Medina. Talhah himself was not known for his scholarship or for narrating many narrations. He narrates about 20 hadith and that's because he was noted for his courage and his generosity. But he was not the scholar amongst the scholars of the companions of the Prophet SAW.

His daughter however Aisha grows up to become one of the greatest scholars of hadith and fiqh in Medina. She was sought after, narrated from, and her primary teacher is the one that she is named after, Aisha bint Abi Bakr who is also her aunt. So many of the narrations from Aisha, the daughter of Abu Bakr as-Siddiq RA actually come through her. You'll have Aisha, the daughter of Talhah, narrating from Aisha, the daughter of Abu Bakr. May Allah SWT be pleased with them all. May Allah SWT be pleased with all of the companions of the Prophet SAW and join us with them and with the Prophet SAW as brothers and sisters in the highest companionship. Allahuma Ameen. 

