And so the person we're going to talk about today is Hibbu Rasulillah SAW. His nickname is the loved one of the Prophet SAW, the beloved of the beloved SAW. And that is, anybody know? Anybody? We already talked about Ali. The question, who is Hibbu Rasulillah? The beloved one of the Prophet SAW. The nickname of this companion? If they're watching the live stream, it's easy.

Zayd ibn Haritha is nicknamed the beloved of the beloved SAW. And I'll get back to what the implications of that are in a moment. If you watch the movie The Message, Zayd plays a very prominent role in the movie The Message, but he looks absolutely nothing like he's portrayed in The Message. So Zayd is described by Ibn al-Jawzi as a man of very dark skin who was close to the Prophet SAW as we'll talk about. His son, Usama ibn Zayd literally has narrations about Abu Dawud describing them from the darkest of the companions. So if we're talking about the race component, go ahead and flip The Message movie again outside of your head and what it actually means and the type of society, equitable society that the Prophet SAW was nourishing just in his very being SAW. So Zayd was described as a short man of very dark skin. He didn't have a big build. And he was ten years younger than the Prophet SAW. His story of coming to the household of the Prophet SAW is so unique that it resembles the story of Yusuf AS. How so? 

First, let's start with who he's from or what his family is. Zayd's father is Harithah ibn Sharahil. He was from an Arab tribe known as Banu Kalb and it was a prominent tribe. They weren't from the area of Mecca though. They weren't from Quraysh or from the area of Mecca but a little bit to the outside. His mother was a woman by the name of Su'adah bint Tha'laba from the Tayy tribe. And Zayd, we know him as the first freed slave to accept Islam, the first of the mawali to accept Islam. But his story of becoming a slave in that society in and of itself is peculiar. It's a very unusual story. He's not like Bilal or Khabbab or the others that were born into that situation or whose families were captured in some sort of war. He has a unique story in and of himself of how he became or how he attained that status or was resigned to that status rather in society when he was a child. So Zayd tells his own story of how this happened to him. 

Zayd was on a trip with his mother to visit some of their relatives, the relatives of his mother. And as Zayd and his mother, Su'adah were on their way outside of Mecca, Zayd said, we went to sleep that night on the way there. They pitched the tent, they went to sleep. And while they were sleeping, a group of bandits attacked. Now when they attacked Zayd and his mother, they stole all of their food, they stole all of their money and ultimately, they kidnapped him also. So Zayd was taken from his mother as a very young child in this situation but he could recall the incident precisely. And the name of the tribe that took him was a tribe by the name of Banu al-Qayn. Banu al-Qayn was known as a military tribe. They were a tribe of troops, they were rough, they accepted Islam after the death of the Prophet SAW. But they were all very skilled warriors, and they had a large contingent of them that were bandits, that were highway robbers, that would especially attack people on the outskirts of the cities where they could do so under the darkness of the night and get away with it. So Zayd recalls this incident where he says that he was asleep next to his mother and it was just him and his mother traveling and suddenly this group of men attacked, they stole everything, took him from his mother and they immediately took him to the slave market of the time, Suq al-Uqaz. 

So Zayd is a young man, he is not Abyssinian, he's not Habashi, he's not from outside of the Arab world or from Mecca. But the way that this is all proceeding is extremely fast. So Zayd says that they took him, they sold him into the slave market, and suddenly Zayd was chained, and he was put into the slave market just like that. And if you think about that moment, how tragic that is what happens to him. It would be hard to think about what's to come next. And like when they say about Yusuf AS, the Prophet Joseph, that Joseph was sold for a few dirhams, Zayd was sold for a few quick coins to get a quick turnover before they could discover that he was captured and kidnapped and put into that circulation of the slave market. So the strategy was kidnap quickly, sell him into the market quickly and then disappear. And that way they won't be able to trace it back and a person is at that point being exchanged from hand to hand. 

So Zayd is in the slave market, his mother and his father were searching for him, they could not find him. And Haritha in particular, the father of Zayd had a deep love for him and he used to author poetry. He'd go out during the day, and he would look for him and he used to author this poetry about Zayd. And it's a very heartbreaking poem because you can see the grief of a father for his son. He would sit outside his door, and he would weep and he would say, “I weep for Zayd not knowing what became of him. I have no idea what's happened to him. Is he alive that maybe I can expect one day to see him again? Or has he been overtaken by death?” Meaning I'm looking for closure at this point. You know it's torture to not know for a fact, you can have an idea, you can think that he's been killed or taken to Ash-Sham, or taken to the Roman Empire because they live far away from Mecca. You can make all these assumptions; I just want closure. Am I ever going to see him again? He said, “By God I ask you, do not comprehend. Was it on flat ground that you died or was it a mountain that brought about your end?’ Meaning I want to know how you died. I want to know if you died and if you did die, I want to know how you died and that way I can start to come to terms with the grieving process. And so, you imagine you've got a father and a mother that are essentially looking for this child that's been kidnapped and he's in a slave market and they have no idea what has happened to him. 

So how does his journey or how does he end up in the house of the Prophet SAW? The story starts with Khadija. We talked about Khadija. Khadija was the wealthiest woman of Mecca. Khadija did not own a large group of slaves. She did not live a luxurious life. She was a modest and humble woman with all of that. So it's not like she had a bunch of slaves in that society running around her, serving her and pampering her. So Khadija one day told her nephew, Hakim ibn Hizam that she's getting tired and she needs some help. So she asked Hakim ibn Hizam if he could provide a servant for her. So Hakim ibn Hizam, he went to Suq al-Uqaz, he went to the slave market, and he purchased Zayd ibn Haritha for 400 dirhams. Small price. Right? This little boy wasn't that old, and he wasn't particularly strong. He had a very small build. He wasn't born into this. He didn't have this reality. So Zayd, remember when we said Abu Bakr saw great value in people. The decree of Allah that Hakim ibn Hizam saw him and Hakim ibn Hizam purchased him and brought him to Khadija and gifted him to Khadija. Now Khadija gets married to the Prophet SAW, and the Prophet SAW and Zayd immediately had a special relationship. The Prophet SAW loved Zayd and saw something special in his character, in his modesty, in his being. And so Khadija recognized that, and she asked the Prophet SAW, “Do you love Zayd?” And the Prophet SAW said, “Yes.” She said, “Then he's yours.” So technically he was gifted to the Prophet SAW. 

He's only 10 years younger than the Prophet SAW. He's not a little boy at this point. So when the Prophet SAW was 25, he would have been 15 years old. And the Prophet SAW did not treat him like someone who was lower than him. He treated him like a son. Treated him like a son in the house already, developed an extremely close relationship to him, did not differentiate between him and his own children in that home. Now what happens is that a few years pass and every day, Haritha is out there looking for his son, and the brother of Haritha is out there looking for him as well. So the brother of Haritha says that I went to the Ka’bah and I saw Zayd with another man over there, with Muhammad SAW and with another group of people. And Haritha said, are you sure? He said, I'm sure. I remember how Zayd looked as a young man. It's been years, right? Years since they've seen him, but I remember him and that was him. So Haritha immediately makes his way to Mecca to find the Prophet SAW. He enters into the Ka’bah, and he finds the Prophet SAW sitting next to the Ka’bah, and he walks up to the Prophet SAW and he says to the Prophet SAW, “You are a people of Banu Hashim. You are known for your generosity. You're known for taking care of the orphans. You're known for taking up the cause of those who are in need. My son Zayd was kidnapped years ago and taken as a slave, and I am willing to give you anything that you want for him. Ask your price and I will pay for his freedom. I will purchase him and free him.” The Prophet SAW said, “How about we let Zayd come here, and if Zayd wants to go with you, you don't have to pay anything. There's no ransom for him.” You know, you're his father. He was taken unjustly. He can go back with his family. He can go back with his father and his mother. So the Prophet SAW called for Zayd.

Zayd came and you can imagine how emotional this is for Zayd as well. The history of Zayd and the conflict inside of him already, his father is coming to him to bring him back to his home. But Khadijah and the Prophet SAW are effectively his parents. Now, if the Prophet SAW was 10 years older than Zayd, then that would make Khadijah RA 25 years older than Zayd. It's practically his parents. He's grown up in a house where he's been shown a lot of love and respect, and Zayd also now has to deal with the sudden reality that his father showed up after all of these years, and he has to make a choice. So when Zayd came, the Prophet SAW said to Zayd, “Do you recognize these two?” Just to make sure it's not someone just claiming to be his father and then not really his father. So Zayd said yes. The Prophet SAW said, “Who are they?” He said, “It's my father and my uncle.” The Prophet SAW told him that you're free to go with them, no ransom, no nothing. Zayd immediately responds and he says, “No, I'll stay with you.” The Prophet SAW did not say anything. The Prophet SAW was giving him a choice. He said go back with your father, go back with your uncle. It's okay, you're free to go now. And when his father heard that, his father said, “Oh Zayd, are you going to choose slavery over freedom? And over your father, over your mother, over your city?” Because remember they weren't from the people of Mecca, and your people. And Zayd’s conflict, the Prophet SAW is telling Zayd go ahead. Zayd is saying, I want to stay with Muhammad SAW.

It's not that he does not like his father, he blames him, but he's developed a relationship now with the Prophet SAW of those sorts. And Zayd says and listen to the words. He said, I have seen something special from this man, meaning the Prophet SAW, and I would never be the one to part ways from him. Meaning he'd have to get rid of me, but I'm not going to part ways from him because there's something special about this man. Speaking about the Prophet SAW. Now by the way, Prophethood has not come yet. He's still just Muhammad ibn Abdullah, as-Sadiq al-Amin, this is before the age of 40, before the Prophet SAW has received revelation. He's just the noble man of Mecca. So the Prophet SAW, he's watching this and the Prophet SAW does not want to interfere. Haritha says, “What does your master do with you?” And Zayd's response, “He treats me better than he treats his own kids and his own family.” That's how Zayd described the treatment of the Prophet SAW and Khadijah with that. Now the Prophet SAW derived that the father of Zayd was more concerned with his well-being. He's a grown man, he's not going to go live with his parents at this point. But he's more concerned with his status in society because he's insisting, why would you choose slavery over freedom? Even though he wasn't being treated like a slave, he was being treated like a member of the household, but still, as far as the social status was concerned, this was his reality. 

So the Prophet SAW, he took Zayd to the steps of the Ka'bah. After Zayd said that the Prophet SAW treats me better than he treats his own family and his own children, the Prophet SAW says, bear witness that he is free, he already freed him, this is my son, he inherits from me, and I inherit from him. Meaning he is just like; he is now free and he is just like my son. When the Prophet SAW announced that, Zayd’s father was pleased. He was happy. Because it formalized the status of Zayd as a free man in society. And Zayd was not going to leave the Prophet SAW. And Zayd was pleased now because from that day he is Zayd ibn Muhammad. He is Zayd the son of Muhammad. So he actually now has the status of a freed man and also the status of a son, regarded socially and legally as the son of the Prophet SAW. Now, how free was Zayd? What kind of respect and status was he given in society at this point? Well, he married Hind bint al-Awwam, a niece of Khadijah. So he married from that most noble of tribes. He also at some point married Umm Kulthum bint Uqba, who was a sister of Uthman. So Zayd was fully treated and integrated into society at that point as a freed man and as the son of the Prophet SAW and Khadijah. He was also engaged to Fakhita bint Abi Lahab, one of the daughters of Abu Lahab, the uncle of the Prophet SAW. And if you remember, the two daughters of the Prophet SAW were engaged to two sons of Abu Lahab. So Ruqayya and Umm Kulthum were both engaged to Utbah and Utaibah, the children of Abu Lahab. The uncle that would of course announce, that would oppress the Prophet SAW more than anyone else when he announced his Islam. The one who is named in the Quran as a humiliated one, who cursed the Prophet SAW as he stood up on Safa and called the people to this new way of life. 

So Zayd was also engaged to the sister of those two men who were engaged to the daughters of the Prophet SAW. So he's functioning literally as a child of the Prophet SAW in this sense. Now obviously, when the Prophet SAW announced that he was a Prophet, Abu Lahab ordered his sons to do what? To divorce or to break off the engagement as a further means of humiliation to the Prophet SAW, to break off the engagement to the daughters of the Prophet SAW. Likewise, here it could be in the same context that the engagement of the daughter of Abu Lahab and Zayd also ended in the same vein or in the same spirit. Now, when did Zayd accept Islam? Right away. The problem is we don't have his story of shahada the way we have the story of Ali and Abu Bakr. So the scholars debated where Zayd fit into those people in terms of timeline. He definitely didn't resist when the Prophet SAW said that he was a Prophet and messenger. At what point did Zayd exactly become a Muslim? Was it between Ali and Abu Bakr? Was it after Abu Bakr? Allah knows best. It's actually not specified, but he's recognized as the first mawla, the first freed man to accept Islam. The first of the mawali to accept Islam at the hands of the Prophet SAW. And Zayd of course, accompanied the Prophet SAW. He remained as a son of the Prophet SAW with all its technicalities. Meaning within the house of the Prophet SAW. Just like any of his other children at that point. He was an adopted son of the Prophet SAW. And he would witness the most painful day of the Prophet's life. What was that day? It was the day of Ta'if.

Zayd was the only person with the Prophet SAW on the day of Ta'if. And of course, Ta'if was an extended ordeal. But that particular last day, the story of Ta'if, who's dead at this point? Khadija is dead. Abu Talib is dead. It's basically open season on the Prophet SAW. Anyone can kill him at any time. It's at the last stages of persecution in Mecca. There is nobody who can protect the Prophet SAW in that context. The Prophet is desperately looking for someone to accept him and to give him protection from the persecution of Mecca. He goes out to Ta'if, which of course is very close to Mecca. Medina is very far. Yathrib was very far. Ta'if is very close. Yathrib, which would become Medina, was a bunch of young people. Ta'if had some of the leaders, had some of the great idols that the people of Mecca would worship. They had some of the royals who lived in the area of Ta'if. If any of you ever go to Ta'if, it's a beautiful place. A beautiful place right on the outskirts of Mecca. Almost an entirely different environment than the environment of Mecca. So the Prophet SAW went out there. For two weeks, he was mocked. He was humiliated. He was made fun of. He was kicked from door to door. Every single person who rejected the Prophet SAW and Ta'if did not just reject him but rejected him in the most humiliating way possible. And Zayd was with the Prophet SAW.

And for that long stretch, when finally at the end of calling people to Islam in Ta'if, and looking for someone to take him in SAW, to shield him, after all of this had happened, they lined up two rows of their kids and others, and the thugs of Ta'if. And they made the Prophet SAW walk between those two rows, and it was a stretch of miles. And each one of them hit him with a shoe, spat on him, punched him. The Prophet SAW fell over multiple times. Not a single part of his body was not covered in blood, SAW. He literally, the Prophet SAW, remembered, even his shoes being full of stones at that point because of the amount of times that he was knocked over, and the amount of torture that took place with the Prophet SAW. Zayd remembered that day, and Zayd was trying to go in front of the Prophet SAW, as a lone supporter of the Prophet SAW, to stop the blows of the people from reaching the Prophet SAW. So imagine having witnessed that. The most painful day of the Prophet's life. Aisha asked the Prophet SAW what the worst day of his life was. Was it Uhud, when he almost died, and many of his companions were killed? The Prophet SAW said no, it was Ta'if. That was the worst day of the Prophet SAW's life. And Zayd was with the Prophet SAW, trying to protect him and guard him. He saw the Prophet SAW go under a tree to seek respite, after having walked and being beaten for how long? For over 15 miles. If you actually measure the stretch, the path of where the Prophet SAW was beaten, imagine he would have walked 15 miles, beaten, tortured, turned away. That's enough to break any human being. Especially, he's already lost Khadijah, he's lost Abu Talib, he's lost his closest family, Mecca is bleak, it has no hope. 

And Zayd saw the Prophet SAW take respite under a tree and call out to Allah SWT with the most painful of words, asking, “Where do I go next? Who are you going to leave me to? Who do I go to at this point? Am I entrusted to a stranger? Am I entrusted to a close person? Who's going to take care of me? What is my next step?” And the Prophet SAW is looking for answers desperately in those moments as the blood is still fresh on the Prophet SAW. Zayd was with the Prophet SAW, when Jibreel AS came to him and the angel of the mountains, and offered to the Prophet SAW to punish his people for what they had done. Not just to crush the people of Ta'if, but to crush the people of Ta'if and Mecca. The mountain of Ajyad, which is on the other side of Mecca, all the way to that mountain in Ta'if to crush them all, and the Prophet SAW said, “No, because it might be that from their children there will be people who worship only one.” Maybe their children will be different. So the Prophet SAW chose mercy and spared them even in those moments. So Zayd accompanied the Prophet SAW on the worst day of his life. And you can imagine what that does in terms of building a relationship. When the most traumatic day of your life, there was only one person that was with you, that was trying to protect you in the midst of all that. And of course, Zayd himself was covered in blood and took a beating in those moments trying to protect the Prophet SAW. Zayd was also sent back in the Hijrah to accompany the family of the Prophet SAW.

So Zayd was the one who accompanied, remember, Fatima and Ali were not married yet, so he accompanied Fatima, Saudah, Umm Kulthum, and the household of the Prophet SAW on that migration, on that Hijrah as the Prophet SAW went out in Mecca. I'm sorry, left him and Abu Bakr made their way out of Mecca. Now when Zayd got to Medina, who was his brother? The Prophet SAW was pairing the Ansar and the Muhajireen together. The people of Medina with the people of Mecca together, but there were a few exceptions to that rule. So you'll see some that were paired together that were both from Mecca. The people of Medina in general were the Ansar, the helpers who received the people of Mecca, the Muhajireen, those that migrated from Mecca. And specifically, an Ansari is a person or the brothers of the Muhajireen were those who took them into their own households and shared half of everything with their brothers and sisters from Mecca. But the Prophet SAW paired Zayd with Hamza, his uncle SAW. And Zayd and Hamza were extremely close. And in fact, Hamza, the uncle of the Prophet SAW, entrusted Zayd with his last testament. And so if you think about this by the way, Hamza is the grand uncle of Zayd in that context. Because it was still a time of adoption. So there's a family relationship there. And Zayd was the one who took that testament from Hamza. 

Zayd was an extremely talented warrior. He was very talented in battle. He was one of the archers of the Prophet SAW. He fought in all of the battles with the Prophet SAW. In the battle of Badr, in the battle of Uhud, in Al-Khandaq, in Khaybar. He was next to the Prophet SAW on the day of the treaty of Hudaybiyyah. And the Prophet SAW appointed him, left him behind as the governor of Medina when the Prophet SAW left. So he is functioning as a very special confidant to the Prophet SAW. Remember the Prophet SAW had no adult sons. None of his sons lived beyond infancy. So Zayd is basically functioning as his only son if you think about what it looks like in that society. Ali of course, was like a son, son-in-law and was treated in a special way. But Zayd is Ibn Muhammad. He is the son of Muhammad SAW. The Prophet SAW sent Zayd on seven military expeditions. Something that is very telling is that he put him as a commander of each one. So when the Prophet SAW sent out any military expedition with Zayd, Zayd was a commander. 

Now, what happens next in terms of the marriage of Zayd at that point? We talked about Baraka Umm Ayman. Who the Prophet SAW called my mom after my mom. Because of what Umm Ayman represented to the Prophet SAW. The Abyssinian woman. Now, think about this story by the way. Umm Ayman was a Abyssinian. She was an Abyssinian woman, and she was purchased from the Suq al-Uqaz. From the same slave market that they had at the time before Islam. Purchased by the father of the Prophet SAW. So she came into the household of the Prophet SAW in that way. And of course, as a young woman, cared for the Prophet SAW when he was born. Was the first one to hold the Prophet SAW. As he was born into this world, and we talked about how special Umm Ayman was. Zayd was kidnapped into that market. And ended up in that process of slavery into the house of the Prophet SAW. How in the world does Zayd, the son, marry the woman who is like a mother to the Prophet SAW. Very simple, the Prophet SAW said, “Whoever wants to marry a woman of Jannah, then marry this woman.” Zayd said, I got it. I want to marry her. So he jumped at the opportunity to marry a woman from paradise. That was it for him. And he indeed married her, and they had Usama ibn Zayd. Usama ibn Zayd was so beloved to the Prophet SAW that his nickname was the beloved one, the son of the beloved one of the Prophet SAW. And the Prophet SAW treated Usama the same way he treated Al-Hassan, Al-Hussein, and his other grandchildren. 

So if you remember when we talked about the story of Ali and Fatima, it was common to see Al-Hassan, Hussein, and Usama all jump on the Prophet SAW. And he would love Usama ibn Zayd so much that if you wanted to get to the Prophet's ear, you sent Usama. So there's a famous story, if some of you remember when we did the 40 hadith on social justice, a very famous story about the royal lady from Banu Makhzum, a very noble woman that stole. And she wanted to avoid at that time, you couldn't be punished if you were from the higher classes. Punishments were only taken, pretty much what happens now by the way, harsh punishments are exacted on poor people of no class, no tribe. If you're from a noble tribe, it's very easy, you get a connection, call it off. And the Prophet SAW said, it's an equal system, everyone's going to be treated equally and in the same way. Whether you're the most royal of people or you're a slave in that society and you have no protections under the state of the Prophet SAW, everyone is treated the same. 

Now that was a complete shift for that tribal society. These were the people that had to come together for hilf al-fudul (Alliance of Virtue), to protect the lowest amongst them, because it was just so tribal that it was easy to be taken advantage of. And so they wanted to appeal to the Prophet SAW to be lenient with that woman and not properly penalize her. So what did they do? They talked to Usama ibn Zayd to go talk to the Prophet SAW, because they knew that Usama ibn Zayd always had the ear of the Prophet SAW. They also, you find that when the Prophet SAW went through his most difficult moments, one of his most difficult moments, which was the slander of his wife, the slander of Aisha. He takes Usama ibn Zayd, a very young man, into confidence, asks for his advice. That's the type of relationship that he had, not just with Zayd, who, though technically his son, was only 10 years younger than him, so it was more like a brother to him and Usama ibn Zayd. 

Now in the process, so you've got this special family now, you've got Umm Ayman, Zayd, Usama ibn Zayd. In the process of the Prophet SAW trying to break the social hierarchies and structures that existed in society, he wanted to marry people from different tribes and different classes to one another to shatter that. So if someone was a freed slave, then it wasn't that they were restricted and they could only marry another freed slave. If someone was from a tribe that was generally disregarded, they couldn't just marry from there. The Prophet SAW wanted to break the marital hierarchy in terms of wealth, in terms of social status, in terms of tribe. And , you find so many examples of this where the Prophet SAW insists on people from different tribes formulating a marriage, people in terms of different status, in terms of the superficiality of how beauty is judged. The Prophet SAW is trying to shatter all of that. So the Prophet SAW wanted to marry Zayd to Zaynab, Zaynab bint Jahsh. Zaynab is an extremely noble woman, extremely wealthy woman, who lives in a certain way and who is sought after in that sense. The thing is, Zaynab wanted to marry the Prophet SAW. The Prophet SAW had another idea which was to shatter this social barrier, this social structure. He's known Zaynab her whole life, but to shatter it, the Prophet SAW chooses to eliminate that status in the equation of marriage. What ends up happening is that Zayd and Zaynab cannot mend their differences. Their differences were too many for them to be able to get along. Zayd and Zaynab both wanted out of the marriage. Now Allah SWT revealed not just the divorce of Zayd, but also that Allah was also going to mandate a new rule as well in society, which was replacing adoption with fostering. 

Why? What does Allah do? He reveals that the dissolving the marriage of Zayd and Zaynab and the marriage of the Prophet SAW to Zaynab. Now if the Prophet SAW was doing this himself, he would have saved himself a headache and gotten married to Zaynab before anyway. He's known her for a long time, so it's a very easy orientalist criticism that they could launch at the Prophet SAW and say he used revelation to get himself out of a tricky situation. It doesn't make sense from the way that these two knew each other from before and the way that the Prophet SAW could have easily asked for a hand without any of that happening. What did Allah SWT do with this? Allah said from now on, people should be called in accordance with their actual families. Allah did not do away with this idea of taking care of the orphans, this idea of freeing the slaves. Adoption in the spirit of it. But one of the objectives of the religion is the preservation of lineage. So effectively, Zayd is not going to leave the care and the love of the Prophet SAW, but Zayd is Zayd ibn Haritha. He's still Zayd ibn Haritha. By the way I have a long lecture online on yaqeen if you search adoption foster care. You can see all the fiqh and all of the rulings. I don't want to get caught up into that. But the point being that Allah SWT, by dissolving that marriage and Allah SWT marrying the Prophet SAW to Zaynab, made very clear those barriers now when it came to between adoption and foster care. 

Now what happens with Zayd in the process of that? Zayd is the only companion of the Prophet SAW, male or female, who is mentioned by name in the Quran. Who when you say his name, in recitation, that is a form of worship and a form of keeping that act of worship to Allah SWT. So Zayd gets a special distinction in the process of that dissolution of the marriage of Zayd and Zaynab, and instead is named in the Quran. So that's one of the virtues of Zayd. Zayd would, as I said, go out and command the armies as the Prophet SAW commissioned them. He led the expeditions, and he led the expedition of the battle of Mu'tah, which was a very difficult battle. Okay, so it was 200,000 Romans against about 3000 Muslims. So the numbers were extremely disproportionate in that battle as the Romans were encroaching upon the Muslims in these times. And they fought in the area of Jordan, of what is modern day Jordan. And not only did Zayd die in the battle of Mu'tah, Ja'far ibn Abi Talib who we will have a session about the cousin of the Prophet SAW died in Mu'tah. Abdullah ibn Rawaha, a great companion died. There were very close people to the Prophet SAW that died and that were martyred in this battle. Jibreel AS came to the Prophet SAW and actually informed him of the deaths of Zayd, Ja'far and Abdullah ibn Rawaha.

So that did not come to the Prophet SAW in the form of a messenger coming back. But instead, it was revealed through Jibreel AS before the news of the army, before the news of the battle would even get back from the area of Jordan. And the Prophet SAW ascended the pulpit to announce the news that Jibreel AS, the angel, had informed him of the loss of the Muslims and the deaths of those noble people. And the Prophet SAW was weeping as he announced the death of his son Zayd, who was like his son, even though he was Zayd ibn Harithah, who grew up in the household of the Prophet SAW. Hibbu rasulillah, the heart and the love of the Prophet SAW. And they could see the pain in the eyes of the Prophet SAW in those moments. Now we can take a few things from this for us. Number one, just a very practical matter, hibbu rasulillah, the loved one of the Prophet SAW. What that means is that one of the ways of loving the Prophet SAW is loving what he loved, loving who he loved. So loving Zayd in particular is an act of worship. Loving Zayd is an act of loving what the Prophet SAW and who the Prophet SAW loved. For him to have that nickname is very special, and it's a form of closeness to Allah and to his Messenger SAW, as is the case with his son Usama ibn Zayd. And Aisha, she says just impressing upon us how special this man was to the Prophet SAW. She says, that the Prophet SAW never sent an expedition out and Zayd was amongst them except that Zayd was in charge of them. And this is Aisha, the daughter of Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with them, saying, she said if he were to have lived, the Prophet SAW would have appointed him as the Khalifa. 

That kind of, first of all the hadith is authentic and Muslim Imam Ahmed, before someone pulls out searches on sunnah.com and doesn't find it. Not every authentic hadith is on sunnah.com. The hadith is an authentic hadith from Aisha, the daughter of Abu Bakr, the first Khalifah, in praise of Zayd ibn Haritha. Now, when Aisha says that, what do we take from that? That the Prophet SAW would have appointed him as the Khalifah. Is there a literal form of that? Again, if he was like the son of the Prophet SAW and the Prophet SAW always sent him in charge of the army and he had that position, could that have very well ended up being the case after all that we talked about of the Prophet SAW making it very clear that Abu Bakr was number one in so many different ways? Allah knows best. He didn't live to see those moments. But what we do take from it, the only real beneficial thing beyond just trying to spend hours and hours, now I'm going to go compare the virtues of Zayd to the virtues of Abu Bakr, who the Prophet SAW said was the best person that ever walked the face of the earth after the Prophets. Beyond that, what we do take is just how special his status was. And when you're talking about the great ones, you're talking about Hibbu Rasulillah, the beloved one of the Prophet SAW, who ended up dying with that type of a noble status. 

What does that mean, or how do we also contextualize that one other thing is that who did the Prophet SAW put in charge of the army after his death? Usama ibn Zayd. So the Prophet SAW never sent out an army except that Zayd was in charge when he was alive and amongst them. And when the Prophet SAW passed away, he had appointed Usama ibn Zayd in charge of the expedition of the Muslims that would fight against the Romans, and the Muslims won under Usama. If you remember that entire incident between Abu Bakr and Umar, may Allah be pleased with them, arguing about, or Umar bringing forth the objection that Usama ibn Zayd was too young to lead an army. So Allah knows best. Maybe had Zayd lived, he would have been that person instead of Usama ibn Zayd. But it's a very special person that we're talking about, an incredible story, one that I love deeply. Because Umar was a learner. The beauty of Umar is that you watch Umar bin al-Khattab grow through his interaction with the Prophet SAW, through his interaction with Abu Bakr, through his interaction with the companions, and then apply everything that he learns in that process. So the journey of Umar is very raw, it's very telling, and you can see a practical implementation of everything that happens between him and one of the companions. Anything he sees, he implements, which is part of his sincerity. So when Umar was the khalifah, he used to give a greater pension to Usama ibn Zayd. He would give extra to Usama ibn Zayd. And one of the children of Umar said to Umar bin al-Khattab, “Why do you give extra to Usama ibn Zayd?” And it's not that he wanted extra, but he was shocked by it. It's like, why are you preferring him so much and so blatantly? So Umar responded and he said, first of all, you are not better than him. Not because he didn't put his son down, he said the Prophet SAW loved his father more than he loved me, and loved him, meaning Usama ibn Zayd, more than you. And he appointed Usama ibn Zayd a commander over me. Remember that incident where Umar came and told Abu Bakr that some of the companions don't like this young, that the fact that he's so young and he's in charge of all of us, and Abu Bakr told Umar, you want me to disobey the Prophet SAW? So now he's saying, look, the Prophet loved his father Zayd more than he loved me, he loved Usama ibn Zayd more than he loved you, and the Prophet SAW appointed Usama ibn Zayd a commander over me. 

So this shows you the way the psyche was moulded to understand the special position and the special preference that they have. And of course, just the miracle of Allah in the way that Zayd was brought into the house of the Prophet SAW. Right? The circumstances that brought Zayd into that house to become the person that he was. The fact that the Prophet SAW treated him like a son, treated him so well that Zayd could testify even before Islam, that the Prophet SAW treated me better than he would treat his kids and that he would treat his own family. So imagine then when the Prophet SAW says that the people are like precious stones, the best of you in the days of ignorance are the best of you in Islam, if you add that understanding of Islam. The fact that the Prophet SAW had taken it to that next level, taken it to that next step after Islam, is a testimony to the character of this man. And of course, with all of that, the sacrifice, right? The fact that Zayd was the son of the Prophet SAW or lived like the son of the Prophet SAW even after adoption was switched to fostering, it doesn't mean that the Prophet SAW sheltered him away and that he sat back and enjoyed the perks of being known to the Prophet SAW. That meant a greater sacrifice. And that's actually a consistent theme when you look at the family of the Prophet SAW, that being part of his family meant that you were involved more in the sacrifice, not sheltered from the sacrifice of the Messenger SAW, which was an example of his servant leadership SAW. So we ask Allah SWT to be pleased with them, to allow us to follow in their example, to allow us to love him because the Prophet SAW loved him, and to allow us to come closer to the beloved SAW by our love for him. Allahuma Ameen.

