As-salamu alaikum wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh everyone. So let's look at Zubayr ibn al-Awwam ibn Safiyyah RA today and let's sort of pick up right where we left off last time where we were speaking about the strength of Safiyyah bint Abdul Muttalib and the type of character that she was raising him to be. The type of strength that she was imparting upon Zubayr RA and hoping that he would grow up with, and of course he would grow up with that strength and exceed all of the expectations of that strength and that courage and that intelligence and that nobility and that honour. As we mentioned, when he became Muslim, his mother argued with him. His mother did not like that, and Zubayr RA was going to be tortured by the same uncle who told Safiyyah that she was too rough on him before. And this uncle was Naufal ibn Khuwaylid, and I believe it was a few years ago that I actually gave a khutbah about him because he was a fascinating character to me. 

Can you imagine how hurtful it was to the Prophet SAW that the love of his life, Khadija RA, that her brother was one of his fiercest enemies. You don't hear much about him. You don't hear the Prophet SAW talk much about him but he was so fierce in his persecution of the Prophet SAW and the things that he would say to the Prophet SAW and then even coming forth on the day of Badr to try to kill the Prophet SAW that the Prophet SAW nicknamed him and he was known as the shaytan of Quraysh. And this is what I was speaking about in the khutbah, I remember reading about Naufal ibn Khuwaylid the first time and thinking to myself, ‘Ya Allah the brother of Khadija is the shaytan of Quraysh.’ The brother of Khadija RA, who did everything for the Prophet SAW who sacrificed her entire life for the Messenger of Allah SAW, and her own brother was the one that would come forth to try to kill the Prophet SAW. And it was deeply hurtful to the Prophet SAW, and the Messenger of Allah SAW did not want to come face to face with him in the battle of Badr. He hated that the brother of Khadija would be such a fierce enemy to him because of how much he loved Khadija RA. 

So Zubayr RA was going to be tortured by his uncle Naufal ibn Khuwaylid which was known at the time especially with the early converts before the open persecution of people that people would be tortured by their own families. That was an initial tactic to try to get them to renounce their faith, and that was what was known to the society at the time. Now let's talk about this. Az-Zubayr RA, how early is his Islam? Some of the scholars put him as early as the fourth or the fifth Muslim. Now, obviously this is after Khadija and Ali, and Abu Bakr, and then you have Zayd ibn Haritha, and you have some of those very early converts. Some of the scholars put him right after Abu Bakr. They say that he embraced Islam right away with Abu Bakr as-Siddiq RA and he is inseparable from Talha ibn Ubaidullah RA, who we'll talk about after Asma RA. 

So Zubayr and Talha, Talha and Az-Zubayr. These two are inseparable because of their age and they're embracing Islam together at the hands of Abu Bakr as-Siddiq RA. And the youth, they're only 12 or 13 years old each as they're coming to embrace Islam, and they listen to the da'wah of Abu Bakr, and immediately they're convinced. They know the Prophet SAW, they're immediately convinced, Az-Zubayr of course, knows the Prophet SAW through multiple routes. He's the first cousin of the Prophet SAW because of his mother, Safiyyah, and of course his father was the brother of Khadijah RA. So he doesn't need much convincing, and you will have here with these two young men, 13 years old, embracing Islam. The neighbours of the Prophet SAW, Talha and Zubayr. So if we pray that we make it to Jannah and we ask Allah for Jannatul Firdaus, when we go to visit our beloved messenger SAW, we will find his neighbours in Jannah to be Zubayr and Talha. May Allah SWT be pleased with them both and that is not something that is earned lightly. That comes with a lot. May Allah allow us to be amongst them. So how do you get to that level? Let's start off with the obvious. When Zubayr embraced Islam, he lost all of his friends with the exception of Talha and Ali, as well, who were close to his age and also his first cousin because of Abu Talib. So he loses his friends, he's ridiculed by the youth.

He already had the issue of having to overcome the barrier of being an orphan in society and a society that mistreated orphans and as we mentioned, his mother used to beat him and used to discipline him severely before Islam. After Islam, now his uncle comes and beats him and this is a man that was called the Shaytan of Quraish for a reason. His beating of Zubayr was so severe and it was very cruel. He would wrap Zubayr RA up in a rug and he put him in a small room and then he would light a fire next to his face and the smoke of that fire would suffocate Zubayr RA and he would step on him and beat him and tell him to renounce Islam. Zubayr RA, this 13-year-old would scream so loudly every single night until he would pass out due to the suffocation. He would scream out and says, “I will never renounce Islam.” I will never disbelieve, and he'd keep on shouting that out as his uncle would light the fire next to his face, which were obviously burned, but suffocate him until he would pass out and the people would walk by the home and they would hear the screaming of Zubayr RA. But it wasn't the screaming of torture, it was the screaming of resistance. So the courage that his mother wanted him to have, the falcon that she wanted him to be, Zubayr RA was all that and more and insisting on his place. 

As you go on in the story of Zubayr RA, you see that he becomes a student of the Prophet SAW very early on. He doesn't miss his lessons in Dar al-Arqam. So he goes from his torture and you would think that some of that torture would shake him up a bit, that would deter him a bit. It doesn't stop him at all. He would always be amongst the people of Dar al-Arqam, listening to the Quran as it came down, accompanying the Prophet SAW, despite whatever torture he would have to face. Him, Talha, and Ali become a trio. So he's inseparable from Talha, even in their names, Talha and Az-Zubayr and Ali RA as well in the age and in the closeness that they have. So they become a trio of sorts. 

But he has a unique moment with the Prophet SAW from the very early days of Islam. Now notice that he's being tortured like the others are being tortured. And to this point, especially in the early days, the Prophet SAW himself was not facing physical persecution. So they did not put their hands on the Prophet SAW just yet. But the Prophet SAW was sitting one day and as he is sitting, Zubayr RA, this young man who is facing the torture of his life comes running towards the Prophet SAW breathing heavily and he's holding his sword. And he arrives at the Prophet SAW panting, holding his sword and then he catches his breath, and the Prophet SAW says, “What's wrong with you? What's going on here? Are you coming to give me some news? What's happening here?” He said, “Ya Rasulullah, I was told that you were attacked.” So Rasulullah SAW, he smiled at Zubayr RA, and he said, “What were you going to do if I was attacked?” “I was going to hit whoever attacked you with this sword. That's what I was going to do.” So the Prophet SAW was impressed by the courage of Zubayr that he wasn't thinking about his own persecution.

He wasn't thinking about how all the odds were stacked against them in Mecca so early on. He heard that the Prophet SAW was attacked, and he went forth to defend the Prophet SAW right away, not thinking about the consequences of which would have surely been that he would be killed. We're talking about the early days of Islam. So that's why Zubayr RA earns that noble title of being the first one to draw his sword in defence of the Prophet SAW in Mecca as the persecution would start to grow of our messenger SAW. So he is facing his own persecution. It is severe. He's a student of Dar al-Arqam. He is constant in the presence of Talha and Ali. He's constant in the presence of the Prophet SAW. But as his persecution increases, his personal persecution at the hands of his uncle, who was the shaytan of Quraysh, Naufal ibn Khuwaylid, the Prophet SAW gives him permission to migrate to Abyssinia, with his cousin Ja'far RA. So Ja'far is also his first cousin, again because of his mother Safiyyah ibn Abdul Muttalib. So he goes to Abyssinia and he was not married. So most of the group of Abyssinia, when you start to look at them, they were couples. Zubayr RA was sent alone to Abyssinia alongside Ja'far RA, the daughter of the Prophet SAW and Uthman RA and Umm Salama and Abu Salama and Umm Habiba and her husband, Ubaidullah ibn Jahsh, and so on and so forth. He goes along with them as an individual. And what happens to him in Abyssinia, as this young single man amongst this community of believers is that he gains a closeness to Najashi himself and he's one of those that would help Najashi learn the deen as well.

So we learn about Ja'far RA, obviously who played the most pivotal role in his relationship with the ruler of Abyssinia, Najashi RA. But also with Zubayr RA, he establishes a relationship with Najashi himself and Zubayr RA was one of those, and this is significant because you can imagine the sentiment to a person like Zubayr. He was one of those who knew Najashi, established a relationship with him, and then prayed janaza on him from Medina. However, the janaza that was done for Najashi RA was done in Medina in his absence. Zubayr RA lined up behind the Prophet SAW in Medina and prayed the janaza on Najashi in Abyssinia whom he had a personal relationship with. And one of the famous incidents that we have already covered in the life of Umm Salama RA, who of course narrated the majority of what happened in Abyssinia, when she mentions that there was an attempted coup on Najashi that a group of people had rebelled against him and we were afraid that he was going to be removed as a result of it. That they met at the Nile River for a battle and obviously the Muslims had to stay out of it and Najashi had privately given to Ja'far and Uthman and the Muslims a ship, and given them a contingency plan in case he himself was going to be killed. Because the protection of the Muslims was guaranteed through him. If they were going to be at the mercy of another ruler in Abyssinia, Allah knows what would have happened to them. So they're waiting nervously on the side away from the two armies and they wanted to know what was happening. 

Az-Zubayr RA was the youngest, he was extremely fit, he knew how to swim and because he had that skill, they were so anxious that whether it's not clear whether Zubayr RA himself volunteered or whether they asked Zubayr RA. But they made something for him like a little skin for him to be able to go in the Nile itself and to check on the battle and then to come back and to report to the Muslims what was happening. So Zubayr RA goes into the Nile. He goes to where the battle is taking place and then he comes back, and as they see Zubayr RA swimming in the Nile to come back, and they're waiting for the news Az-Zubayr RA chants. You can imagine the scene from the Nile, and so when he shouted Allahu Akbar, she mentions that they all started to do takbir and she said that I don't think she swore by Allah SWT. We were ever so happy and relieved. So Najashi came back and Allah established him, after destroying his enemy, and the chiefs of the Abyssinians submitted to him again, and she said we were in the best of conditions all the way until we returned to the Prophet SAW. So that wAz-Zubayr RA who courageously went through the Nile to check up on the two battles or the battles between the two armies, one of course the army of the righteous Najashi RA. 

Now that is an important feature of him because it plays consistently into his personality. Zubayr RA established a close relationship to Hamza, of course, his uncle. If he was that beloved to his mother, Safiyya, then obviously you can imagine the relationship between Zubayr and Hamza, and they have that same warrior type of personality. He had a deep relationship with his cousin Ali RA, and he also had a deep connection to his cousin Ja'far RA in Abyssinia, but the physical being of Zubayr, what would Zubayr RA look like if you saw him. There isn't much about his colour or his appearance. It's mentioned that he had a light beard, so he didn't have a full beard but he's mentioned as being extremely tall, and lean, and muscular, and it's said about him that he was similar in his height to Umar bin Khattab RA, and that when he sat on an animal, his feet would almost touch the ground from his horse because of how tall he was. So he had a prominent height, and he was extremely lean and muscular, and as we've seen here, could do things that others could not do and that would obviously play out in many ways in battle. 

Zubayr RA is one of those companions of the Prophet SAW whose legacy is almost entirely tied to his actions in battle alongside the Prophet SAW and in taking on assignments that other people were not willing to take on. So this is Zubayr RA. When did he marry Asma’ bint Abi Bakr RA? He married her after Abyssinia. So he came back to Mecca prior to the migration to Medina and he marries Asma’, the daughter of Abu Bakr, and Abu Bakr RA wanted his daughters to be married to those who were struggling in the path of Allah SWT. So Abu Bakr knows what's going to come out of this. Asma’ knows what type of marriage she's getting into in the sense of his struggle, his lifestyle, the riskiness of being married to a person like Zubayr RA, who's never just an average person in the battle, but who's always out front and who lives a very difficult lifestyle. But that was what Allah had willed and that was what Abu Bakr RA and Asma’ RA sought as well, to be in the path of Allah SWT in that struggle. 

Now Asma’ who we'll talk about. who is you know there is just something about the quality of these three. You can imagine how much courage was in that household of Asma’ and Zubayr and Safiyyah all together, not to then mention the children that would come after them. Asma’ RA made the hijrah while she was very late in her pregnancy, and obviously Asma’ played a role in the hijrah of the Prophet SAW, which we'll talk about. She was not just tasked with traveling from Mecca to Medina, but she also plays a role in assisting the Prophet SAW and Abu Bakr as-Siddiq RA in the migration of the Prophet SAW, all while she was very pregnant. So Asma’ and Zubayr arrive in Medina, and obviously when you read about the hijrah to Medina and you read about the way that the Muslims who came from Mecca felt, they felt like Medina was death. They complained about the new conditions, they were homesick, they missed Mecca. A lot of them got sick because they weren't used to the water of Medina, even though Medina is so much more pleasing to at least a neutral eye or someone who comes from outside. The agriculture of Medina, the landscape of Medina, it's so much different, but they weren't used to the environment of Medina and they had a hard time. 

And one of the claims that was made in Medina from some of the enemies of the Muslims was that there was a spell on the Muslims, so that they would not be able to have anyone give birth. So you can imagine now, as they made it to Medina, they're also starting to hear this rumor that is swirling around Medina that the Muslims are not going to be able to have any children, that all of the women have the spell on them and they're not going to be able to have babies. They're going to have miscarriages, and for the first couple of months, no one actually had a child. There were numerous miscarriages, and there could be many reasons for that. One of them of course being the change of environment, the difficulties of the hijrah, and just the rate of fatalities at birth at the time, but Asma’ RA and Az-Zubayr would be the first to have a child that gave birth to none other than Abdullah ibn Az-Zubayr RA. Abdullah ibn Az-Zubayr, what an amazing human being and what an amazing lineage. He is the son of Az-Zubayr, the grandson of Abu Bakr, the second cousin of the Prophet SAW. He has a great lineage that comes through these two of Az-Zubayr and Asma’. When he was born, the Prophet SAW himself took his saliva and he did the tahniq, he mixed the saliva in the mouth of Abdullah ibn Az-Zubayr RA, and he made dua and they carried Abdullah ibn Az-Zubayr RA in the streets of Medina and they chanted behind him shouting Allahu Akbar. So it was a victory to even have a child in that environment and that was something that came through Az-Zubayr and through Asma’ bint Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with them all. Az-Zubayr RA would go on to have numerous children with Asma’ and afterwards he would get married multiple times. 

Az-Zubayr RA mentions that the naming mechanism of his children and the naming mechanism of Talha's children was very intentional. Remember, Talha and Az-Zubayr are inseparable. So Talha used to name his children after prophets and that's why Talha is Abu Muhammad. He's the father of Muhammad; he named his first child after Muhammad SAW. Az-Zubayr on the other hand would name his children after warriors. So Abdullah is Abdullah ibn Jahsh, Mundhir, Mundhir ibn Amr, Urwa, the very famous Urwa ibn Az-Zubayr, who gives us so much of the seerah, is just such a crucial link in the seerah, is named after Urwa ibn Mas'ud. He had Hamza, of course Hamza Sayyid al-Shuhada, and the beloved uncle and brother of his mother. Ja'far, he named one of his children Ja'far, he named one of his children Mus'ab, Ubaid ibn al-Harith, Khalid, Umar, these are the names of the children of Az-Zubayr RA. We talk about the importance of naming your children with an intention, who do you want your children to grow up to be like. This is one of those families where you see that they name their children in a very unique and a very special way. 

And Az-Zubayr RA, as we said, is someone whose legacy is prominent in the battlefield. So he said he was tall, he was built, he was like the height of Umar al-Khattab, his feet would touch the ground when he rides his horse. He also had the unique ability, being the only other person than Khalid who could control his horse with his legs and could carry two swords at the same time. So you can imagine in battle, the ability as a horseman to be able to have so much strength in your legs, to be able to guide the horse and direct the legs and have so much strength in both of your arms to wield two swords in the middle of battle and to actually fight that way. That's not easy, and the only other person that they said could do that was Khalid ibn al-Walid RA. And we know about his legacy in the battlefield so that should give you an image of Az-Zubayr RA, that he could ride in the battlefield with both of his swords, and he was extremely productive in battle, guiding his horse with only his legs. 

So every single battle that Az-Zubayr fights in is a day for Az-Zubayr and none more special than the battle of Badr. I get goosebumps when I think about this because the veterans of Badr have a class in Islam, they were those who the Prophet SAW said were forgiven for everything that came before and everything that came after Jibreel AS asked the Prophet SAW who are the best amongst you and how do you consider the veterans of Badr. The Prophet SAW said the veterans of Badr are the best amongst us. Jibreel AS said the angels that fought on the day of Badr carry a special status, for they are the best of us. So just like the veterans of Badr are the best of the companions, the veterans of Badr from the angels are considered the best of the angels, and Jibreel AS of course came forth at the order of Allah SWT with his army of angels on that day of the battle of Badr. What does this have to do with Az-Zubayr? Az-Zubayr RA was one of only two horsemen that day, if you remember the Muslims were caught off guard in Badr, they were not ready for a full out battle. So not only were they outnumbered, they were out armoured, they didn't have horses either.

They only had two horses, whereas you know the other side had a hundred horses, a thousand people. They were fully armed, and they had extra horses on demand when needed. The Muslims had two who rode those horses, Miqdad and Az-Zubayr. So two amongst 315 Muslims had horses, one of them was Az-Zubayr RA. He wore this yellow turban for the day of that battle, and he would penetrate into the army of the mushrikeen and he would fight off all of the horsemen, taking his two swords. He would run between the horsemen and he would wield both of his swords and he would knock people off of their swords right and left in the battle of Badr, and he would suffer two serious wounds in the battle of Badr, which we'll talk about and that didn't slow him down at all. Again, what does this have to do with the angels the Prophet SAW said that on that day? When Allah SWT sent 3000 angels and they fought alongside the believers on the day of Badr, that Jibreel AS and all of the angels were wearing the yellow turban of Az-Zubayr. What an honour to have Jibreel AS imitating you or emulating you and all of those angels of Badr wearing the same turban as you as they went forth and they fought alongside the Muslims. And of course, the miracles were witnessed on the day of Badr. There is no one else that could make that claim to have such a legacy that the Prophet SAW says that Jibreel AS has showed up and all of the angels, and they're dressed like Az-Zubayr RA. What an incredible honour as we said, Az-Zubayr RA suffered two serious wounds on that day.

Urwa ibn Az-Zubayr RA says that as a child, I used to you know there were three holes in my father's body, his whole body was covered in wounds, but there were three wounds that were so severe I could put my fingers in them, and I mean it was holes in his body. He said two of them were from Badr, and one of them from the famous battle of Yarmouk. So this is Az-Zubayr RA going forth on the day of Badr, leading not just the humans but leading the angels as well who were emulating him, including Jibreel AS on that day in the battle of Uhud. Once again the Prophet SAW comes forth on that day, the Prophet SAW makes a few calls. 

Now Uhud is obviously an even greater disadvantage in the sense that the Muslims are more outnumbered and the army on the other side is bigger and the Prophet SAW says, “Who will take my sword?” Zubayr RA immediately says, “I will ya Rasulullah.” The Prophet SAW says again, “Who will take my sword?” and Az-Zubayr RA said, “I will ya Rasulullah.” And the Prophet SAW says a third time, “Who will take my sword?” Abu Dujana RA said, “I will, ya Rasulullah.” And the Prophet SAW gave it to Abu Dujana RA, and the Prophet SAW said to take it with its right, that this is a heavy burden you're going to carry, the sword of the Prophet SAW. So Az-Zubayr RA says, I was hurt in my heart when I saw that the Prophet SAW chose him instead of me, but then when I saw Abu Dujana RA on the battlefield, I understood exactly why the Prophet SAW chose him. Abu Dujana played a prominent role in the beginning of the battle and throughout the battle by the side of the Prophet SAW. But the point is that Az-Zubayr RA answered the call of the Prophet SAW. So he did what would earn him that honour by responding immediately when the Prophet SAW called out and said who will answer my call, then another one comes forward, and that is that. On the other side, there was a man by the name of Talha ibn Abi Talha al-Adri, and he was a huge man from Quraysh, and he also had the best horse of the Mushrikeen, so he is coming forward and he is challenging the Muslims, and he is the best horseman. He has the best horse amongst the Mushrikeen, and that is saying a lot, considering the worth and the value of horses at that time. He was a huge man, and no one no one wanted a piece of this guy. He is that person that you are looking on the other side of the battlefield, and you are thinking you are going to have to have a few people that are going to take him out. He is not an easy person to fight. He is someone who is boastful and arrogant, that has a reputation, so he comes out on the best horse and he calls out and says, “Who is going to come forth and duel with me?” The only person that answers the call is Az-Zubayr RA and the Prophet SAW lets Az-Zubayr go. When Az-Zubayr goes forward, Safiya comes to the Prophet SAW and she says, “Ya Rasulullah he is going to kill my son.” I mean that is not easy, even if you think about the strength and the size. He has the best horse on the other side, he is more equipped than Az-Zubayr. Ya Rasulullah he is going to kill my son, and the Prophet SAW said rather Az-Zubayr is going to kill him.

So Talha bin Abi Talha comes forth, Az-Zubayr RA goes in front of him and obviously the Muslims are nervous. This was a leader in Badr, the one with the yellow turban, and Ali RA describing the heroic nature of Az-Zubayr RA. He says that he had the anger, the burst of a tiger and he would jump at a person like a lion. So he combined the best attributes of a tiger and a lion in battle. Az-Zubayr RA goes up to him, and Talha bin Abi Talha is stunned that Az-Zubayr is standing on the ground and ready to fight him. So he doesn't even have a horse that's going to go at it with him and so they start to duel. Within minutes, Az-Zubayr RA walked up to him, he knocked his sword down and then he attacks him, he knocks him off of his horse, he grabs the sword of Talha bin Abi Talha, he climbs up his horse and then he kills him with his sword and then he brings the horse back to the Muslims. You don't get any more courageous than this, alright so this man, who no one wanted a piece of, who has the best horse on the other side, I mean the best case scenario is that you get the horse too you get the armor, too but like you just want to take him out. I mean like he's that much of a threat on the other side. Az-Zubayr RA kills him, brings the horse back, and now the best horse on the battlefield that day was going to be on the side of the Muslims. So that's when Az-Zubayr RA once again showed something about himself that was so unique about his courage and about his ability to move forward.

Now on that day of course we mentioned you know with Safiyyah and Hamza RA that day, and honestly a very hard biography to cover because of how much I love Hamza RA, but it hurt him that obviously Hamza RA was killed. His cousin, Abdullah ibn Jahsh, the brother of Zainab ibn Jahsh, may Allah be pleased with them was also killed and that's very hurtful to Az-Zubayr RA as well, because of how much he loves him and Az-Zubayr RA was wounded heavily that day and he's one of the few people that did not flee from the Prophet SAW on the day of Uhud. Now, Allah forgave those that fled on the day of Uhud but at the same time the honour of those that did not flee is forever preserved. Those that at the time when it looked like it was all over, the Prophet SAW was to be killed, literally put their bodies in front of the Prophet SAW and suffered all sorts of wounds on that day. Az-Zubayr RA, it's mentioned in some of the books that he actually pursued Abu Sufyan, Hamra al-Asad, where they wanted to after everything had happened, to kill the Prophet SAW, to finish off the Prophet SAW, and seeing Az-Zubayr, they decided it wasn't worth it because of the strength of Az-Zubayr RA and the other companions that were there that day. Aisha RA, she told Urwa ibn Az-Zubayr, do you know the verse that was revealed about your father and your grandfather, who is his father Az-Zubayr, who is his grandfather Abu Bakr As-Siddiq RA? Remember, these people have an incredible lineage in that sense. Az-Zubayr is your father, Asma’ is your mother, Abu Bakr is your grandfather. 

So Aisha who is the aunt of Urwa says to Urwa, “Do you know what verse was revealed about your father and your grandfather? And it was the verse those that responded to the call of Allah and the Messenger SAW.” After that horrendous defeat, after the horrific thing that had happened to them in the battle of Uhud, those that stayed around, those that did not flee, Allah SWT praised them and Allah elevated them. And Aisha RA told Urwa, this is about your father and your grandfather and those that were with them, those that stuck around with the Prophet SAW when others had fled at that point, those that were willing to die at that moment around the Prophet SAW. So in the battle of Uhud, once again you have Az-Zubayr RA, not fleeing by the side of the Prophet SAW throughout and doing as the Prophet SAW commands him.

On the day of Khandaq, one of the greatest honours that comes to Az-Zubayr comes on the day of Khandaq. And you might be thinking how much more honoured you can possibly be than Badr with the angels modelling themselves after you and then Uhud, where Allah reveals the Quran about you for staying by the side of the Prophet SAW. How much more honoured can you be in the battle of Khandaq, as the Prophet SAW got news of those that were plotting on the inside from Banu Qurayza and other tribes. The Prophet SAW asked the companions, “Who will go out and who will sneak into the fortress?” They had a huge fortress in Medina and it's well armed, and obviously if they have truly given themselves up now to kill the Prophet SAW and to attack the Muslims from inside, think about how dangerous it is for someone to go and try to spy on them. But the Prophet SAW calls out and he says who is going to go check on them and find out their news. Az-Zubayr RA immediately he says, “Ya Rasulullah, I've got it.” He responds right away and the Prophet SAW asked again, and Az-Zubayr was the only one that responded. The Prophet SAW asked a third time, and Az-Zubayr RA was excited, he kept responded every single time. Az-Zubayr RA said to the Prophet SAW, “I can do it, O Messenger of Allah.” Listen to what the Prophet SAW says about Az-Zubayr RA, he says, “Every Prophet has a disciple, my disciple in this ummah is Az-Zubayr RA.” With an exclusiveness to it. 

And I want us to seize this point for a moment because it's often just brushed over as one of the virtues of Az-Zubayr RA, the Prophet SAW called him his disciple, likened him to the disciples of Isa AS, al hawariyun, and I want us to actually sit with this for a moment. What is the significance of the Prophet SAW calling him with that specific name of being his disciple, when the hawariyun are mentioned in the Quran, when the disciples of Isa AS are mentioned in the Quran. What are they mentioned with specifically, they are mentioned with responding to the call of Isa AS. Who will support me in this noble mission? So Jesus, peace be upon him, speaking and saying ‘Who's going to come to my aid?’ The hawariyun are praised, they come forth and say we will be the helpers of Allah SWT. So the specific virtue of the disciples in the Quran is their response to the call to support the Prophet. That they immediately respond to the call of Allah SWT without any hesitation. Of course there's a specific disciple that would actually volunteer himself to take the image of Isa AS and to even be crucified in his place, so the hawariyun are praised particularly for the quickness of the response, and what do you keep on seeing with az-Zubayr RA responds immediately.  

He does not think about the consequences of responding to the call of the Prophet SAW, and so that day Az-Zubayr RA goes out and he goes to Bani Qurayza and he puts his life on the line to get the news of Bani Qurayza to find out what their plans are to attack the Prophet SAW. And that was when he came back, and the Prophet SAW did for him what he had only done for Saad RA, which was the Prophet SAW combined his parents for me. When the Prophet SAW said to Zubayr, I would sacrifice my mother and my father for you. The Prophet SAW did not do that except for Saad and then here Az-Zubayr RA. That is an incredible honour that the Prophet SAW would say that to a person, and that is the highest form of praise at that time. We would say that about the Prophet SAW. The Prophet SAW says that to Az-Zubayr RA and Az-Zubayr never forgot that momentous occasion when the Prophet SAW said that to him and it's those types of things that made it all worth it for Az-Zubayr RA. 

Throughout the other battles, you find that Malik ibn U'uf, surrenders in Hunain when he sees that Zubayr is still up. You find Az-Zubayr RA after the Prophet SAW fighting in the battle against the apostates under the khilafah of his father-in-law, Abu Bakr al-Siddiq RA. You find in the battle of Yarmouk, remember, Urwa mentioned specifically the two wounds of Badr, and then he mentioned a wound in the battle of Yarmouk. Yarmouk was a difficult battle for the Muslims against the Byzantines at the time and Az-Zubayr RA led the charge, and one of the things that Zubayr RA did on the battle of Yarmouk was that he climbed the wall of the fortress on the day of the battle of Yarmouk. And he mounted forward, going forth through the Roman army, and this is how Az-Zubayr RA has described, he drove through the entire army himself, penetrating, and he was able to defeat everyone in his path. And then Az-Zubayr RA penetrated all the way to the back of the army, he turned around and then he fought his way all the way back to the front of the army, taking out everyone in his path one man RA, that was able to do that. Before the battle even started to its full, so he went into the army and penetrated all the way to the back taking out everyone on the way, and then took everyone out on the way back, making his way back to the front lines and that was the bravery, the courage, the skill of Zubayr RA. 

And that's why Umar bin Khattab RA described him as a man who's like a thousand men. You give me one Az-Zubayr RA is like having a thousand men due to his bravery and the way that he moved forward. He was also one of the main generals in the conquest of Egypt under Amr bin al-As RA and so Zubayr RA played an instrumental role being a general there as well. After Umar bin Khattab RA passed away, Az-Zubayr of course being one of the remaining 10 promised paradise was chosen to be on the shura of Umar bin Khattab RA, and Az-Zubayr RA of course the shura came together and they chose they cast their vote. Az-Zubayr actually cast his vote for Ali ibn Abi Talib RA, who of course was his cousin and very close to him and Zubayr knew his station with the prophet SAW. 

And I have to mention his death because one of the most tragic deaths that we have and in fact that is the case not just with him, but with his son. How is it that a person so incredible, so amazing, would be killed in the fitan from the inside, not taken out from an enemy on the outside, but on the fitan from the inside. Az-Zubayr RA, when Uthman was under siege, when Uthman RA was put under siege, he sent his children to defend Uthman and Uthman RA told Zubayr to stand down. You've got to imagine how hard it was for Zubayr RA to practice that restraint seeing the way that Uthman RA was being mistreated, but Uthman RA demanded that no blood is going to be spilled in my cause. Stand down. So Az-Zubayr RA wanted to kill them all, he wanted to fight off all of those people, and Uthman RA continued to say no, you can't fight for me, don't do it. So Az-Zubayr sends his children to guard Uthman RA, but he's frustrated at not being able to fight those people that had held Uthman under siege.

Obviously we know what happens next, Uthman RA is murdered and Az-Zubayr RA is devastated by the murder of Uthman. The crisis is that as Ali RA is trying to establish himself in this chaos, that Ali RA wants to organize so that he could properly pursue the killers of Uthman, he makes that promise to pursue the killers of Uthman RA, and the people that push the initial fitna continue to push the fitna and continue to divide the ummah and to maintain that chaos. So Az-Zubayr is in Mecca, and it was himself and Aisha RA and Talha ibn Ubaidullah RA, who of course were struck with the emotion demanding the blood of the killers of Uthman, demanding to go after the killers of Uthman. They come forth and they meet Ali ibn Abi Talib RA before the battle of Al-Jamal, and this is a very tragic conversation and way that he's going to die, but in brief, we know that Aisha RA and Ali RA would talk, they would come to terms, they would go back to their camps and the idea was that there was going to be no battle, that they came to an agreement, that Ali was going to pursue the killers of Uthman, and that things were going to move forward. 

The people of fitna attacked both sides at night, both camps, so that each one of them thought that the other side struck first, and then the battle of Al-Jamal takes place. With Zubayr, he did not even get to that point where they went back to the camps with Aisha RA and Talha RA. And Ali RA on the other side, going to his camp with Zubayr RA, as they came forth to meet Ali RA. Ali said to Zubayr, Oh Zubayr, do you remember the day that we were sitting together and the prophet SAW came up, he saw us sitting together. And sitting together as brothers, I mean, they loved each other, they grew up together, they embraced Islam together, they were the same age, they had a history. Az-Zubayr again voted for Ali RA to be the khalifah over Uthman RA, so Uthman became the khalifah before Ali. Az-Zubayr RA's vote was for Ali RA even initially, and Ali is reminding Zubayr of an incident. He says, “Remember the prophet SAW saw us sitting together and we were sitting together as brothers and the prophet SAW said to you, “Oh Zubayr, do you love Ali RA?” And Zubayr said, “Of course, wallahi I love Ali, ya Rasulullah.” And the prophet SAW said that “You will fight against him, and you will be in the wrong.” And to Zubayr RA, that was impossible I’m gonna fight against Ali RA, I mean how could that happen. There was such a closeness that they had, they grew up together, they loved each other. 

So Ali RA reminded Zubayr of that incident, and he forgot that incident, and when he reminded Zubayr RA of that incident, Az-Zubayr RA broke down in tears. He actually gave his bay'ah to Ali RA, so he gave his pledge to Ali, and he left the battlefield. He walked away from the battlefield. So before at night again, the two camps go and a battle breaks out the next day because each one thinks they've been attacked. Az-Zubayr has already walked away from the battlefield, ‘I'm not doing this right’ he realizes that this was a fitna that was caused, and he remembered that incident with the prophet SAW. Az-Zubayr is walking away, people are following him and they're saying what's wrong and he's saying leave me alone, I'm done, I'm not fighting, I have nothing to do with any of this battle. One of the Khawarij, he follows Az-Zubayr RA. 

So this is the tragedy and his name was Amr ibn Jarmuz. And he goes to Zubayr as he's walking away and he follows him and he walks up to Zubayr. Az-Zubayr says what do you want he says no, I just want to be with you. I just want to accompany you. So Zubayr RA says fine, if it's because you're walking away from this battle just like me, that's fine. But this man had evil intentions. When the time for salah came, it's just Zubayr and this man, he doesn't know that so I just want to be your companion and if they fight, Zubayr is going to overpower him. Az-Zubayr RA is strong even in his old age, there's no way this man is going to be able to overpower him. So what does he do, he waits for the time of salah. Az-Zubayr RA stands up, Amr ibn Jarmuz makes the iqama for salah, Zubayr RA says allahu akbar to lead the salah, and Amr attacks him and starts to stab him until he kills him and he took the sword of Zubayr RA. So he murdered Zubayr RA in his salah. And by the way this is something about the death of Zubayr in his salah. Zubayr RA would die in his salah, Abdullah ibn Zubayr would die in his salah, Urwa ibn Zubayr would die in his salah, this became a pattern of the children of Zubayr RA to also die in their salah.

It's tragic but at the same time you know you will be raised the way that you leave this world. Shahada in salah, that’s incredible, but this is tragic. The man kills Zubayr RA, takes his sword, and he goes to the tent of Ali RA. Ali RA is not seeing people at the moment. Ali RA is sitting in his tent and so this man is approaching with the sword of Zubayr, he says I want to talk to Ali. Ali RA tells the guards, I don't want to talk to anyone right now. So this man, Amr bin Jarmuz thinks that Ali is going to celebrate the death of Zubayr, he gives the sword to the guard and he says go show him the sword. So the man walks and he waits outside to hear the reaction of Ali RA, thinking Ali is going to be happy to hear the murder of Zubayr, because that's what's going to be shown here, that he had come to fight you. I killed him instead. Ali RA is sitting in his tent and the sword of Zubayr RA comes in front of him and Ali RA starts to cry and he starts to weep loudly and Ali RA said, I heard the prophet SAW say, “When you meet the murderer of Ibn Safiyya, when you see the person who kills Zubayr, tell him he's a person of hellfire.” So Ali had heard this hadith from the prophet SAW, he give the news to the one who murders Ibn Safiyya, Zubayr RA, that he's a person of hellfire. Ali had heard it, not realizing that he's going to be sitting in the tent the day that the sword of Zubayr comes to him. And so he starts to repeat, give the news to the one who murdered Ibn Safiyya of hellfire. Amr al-Jarmuz heard the news, he quickly ran away from the tent. Ali RA was getting up to go out and see him, Amr al-Jarmuz quickly ran away, and he committed suicide. 

So he murdered Zubayr RA and then he killed himself. Az-Zubayr RA goes to Jannah amongst the ten promised paradise, Amr al-Jarmuz goes to hell on the tongue of the prophet SAW, which is very rare that the prophet SAW would seal the fate of someone the way that he did that day. And  Zubayr RA, this noble man, who used to make dua to Allah to die in his salah, and his children die in their salah, all of them are given this noble death. And there are two incidents I'll narrate here, to finish this off. One of them is from Abdullah ibn Zubayr RA, he said that Az-Zubayr came to me on the day of his death before he would die, and he just saw the scene and he could smell death in the air, he knew something was going to happen. This is a long hadith in al-bukhari by the way, it's one of the longest hadith. So he called me and he stood beside me and he said, “Oh my son, listen, today someone's going to, you know, a person is going to be killed either as an oppressor or an oppressed one. I think I'm going to die today as an oppressed one.” I don't know why but sensing death and this is something with the salihin that sometimes you see that they sense death, so he's telling his son, Abdullah, that listen I'm sensing death. And what does he say to him? He says my only worry is all the debts that I have. I have so many debts, again ties into the series that we just finished. My biggest worry is my debts, and this man's about to go as a shaheed. I'm about to be killed as an oppressed one. I just feel it, someone's going to kill me and I'll be the mazloom, and not the oppressor. So he said, I'm just worried about my debts and he said to him, “Oh my son, whatever you have to do to pay off my debts, sell our property, give up whatever you can, ask the people, find out who I owe money to. Whatever you have to do, make sure that all of my debts are paid. And if you fall short, when you find yourself in a bind because you can't find a way to pay off my debts, oh my dear son, seek the help of my master.” 

Seek Allah's help and paying off my debts. Why did Az-Zubayr RA have so many debts? Was it because he used to live a life of ease? No, it was his poverty and the fact that Az-Zubayr RA, anytime wealth would come to the home of Az-Zubayr, he'd loan it away or he donated away. So he was famous for not keeping any wealth in his house. No wealth would stay in his house at night and in the process of that, he accumulated a great debt. He had a great amount of debt, this noble man in history, who has this position with Allah and his messenger SAW. So he told his son, seek the help of my lord and Abdullah ibn Az-Zubayr RA says for four years, I would stand up in hajj and I'd call out and I say if anyone has a debt from my father, let me know. He kept on looking for all the people and he said, anytime I would feel anxiety, I would call out to Allah SWT. I would say, “Oh master of Az-Zubayr, pay his debts on his behalf.” So I call out to Allah SWT help me to pay off his debts, and he said and this is a long hadith. 

He starts to go through the period and basically when he comes to what ends up happening from the miracles of Az-Zubayr RA, there were so many more people that owed him money than money that he owed. To that by the time, and again it's about a two-page hadith, by the time each one of these people gave back the loans that were owed to Az-Zubayr, to his family, Az-Zubayr RA's property was valued at over 50 million dinars. So he ends up being a millionaire that never tasted the sweetness of his millions in this life, because of the way that he used to deal with his wealth. So Abdullah bin Az-Zubayr tells this extraordinary story in a long hadith about how there ended up being millions of dinars that were owed to him that he never claimed in his lifetime. Nu'man ibn al-Bashir RA, he says that we were with Ali RA in the last days of his khilafah, and we thought Ali RA was sleeping. And so we were having a conversation amongst ourselves, and Ali RA opened his eyes and said, “What are you talking about?” and they said, “We were talking about Uthman and Talha and Az-Zubayr. We're talking about the people that died in this whole thing.” And Ali RA says I am from the supporters and lovers of Uthman and Talha and Az-Zubayr. And he recited that, “We have taken the grudges anything from their hearts and made them brothers facing one another on thrones. That is us sitting on that day facing one another on thrones.” That the fitna had caused companions to find themselves on opposite ends of the battlefield, and Ali RA was pained over that way, and the nastiness of the way that Az-Zubayr RA was killed. 

And with one thing about Az-Zubayr RA, and that is that we only have about five or six hadiths from him, and that is one of the most extraordinary things about his story. This man who is that close to the prophet SAW, who lived into the time of Ali RA and whose children are Abdullah ibn Az-Zubayr and Urwa ibn Az-Zubayr, and his wife is Asma' bint Abi Bakr. There are so many routes for a hadith to be narrated from him, and yet he did not used to narrate that I heard the prophet SAW say this or I heard the prophet SAW say that. Only a few of them. So Abdullah ibn Az-Zubayr RA says I said to my father, “I don't hear from you the narrations of Allah's messenger the way that I hear from this person and that person.” And Az-Zubayr RA said, “I was always with him. I used to always be with the prophet SAW. But I heard the prophet SAW say whoever lies on my behalf then let him occupy his seat in the fire.” He said, “Basically I was too afraid to narrate a hadith from the prophet SAW out of fear of Allah and fear that I might misrepresent him in narrating from him SAW.” So that speaks to the piety of this man, from the ten promised paradise, the disciple of the prophet SAW. May Allah be pleased with him. May Allah SWT bless him, join us with him the neighbour of the Prophet SAW. JazakumAllahu khayran wasalamualikoum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh

